---
title: Praja Becomes the Raja
---

### Chapter 8
# *Praja* Becomes The *Raja*

The election process in Goa did not begin with its annexation to the
Indian Republic in 1961, but rather with the end of monarchy in
Portugal in 1910 and the emergence of the Republic. However, it was a
‘highclass’ election − limited to those Goans who knew how to read and
write Portuguese, were major of age, and paid a high amount of taxes
to the government. No woman was allowed to vote. Unlike in the past,
when only one Goan was sent to the Portuguese Parliament under the
constitutional monarchy, the new system elected two persons from Goa
to the Portuguese Parliament, and one of them could even be a part of
the Senate.

> *“Mapusa and Madgao were the two constituencies created for the
> purpose. The Mapusa constituency included Bardes, Pednem, Sanquelim,
> Sattari, Daman, Diu and Nagar Haveli, while Mormugao, Salcete, Ponda,
> Ilhas (Tiswadi), Canacona, Quepem and Sanguem came under the Madgao
> constituency.”*[^1]

[^1]: Kamat Varsha Vijayendra; Resurgent Goa: Goan Society from 1900-1961 P 77

Two political parties already existed in Goa: the Partido Indiano,
dominated by Christian Chardos (Kshatriyas), and Ultramar, comprising
of Christian Brahmins. Both parties were pro-Portuguese. Local bodies,
such as municipalities and ‘village boards’ (which were set up if
there were 20 ‘eligible’ people in a village) were elected. Besides
this, by 1915 the Provincial Congress was launched as an autonomous
organisation, which was presided over by Goans. This Congress tried to
widen the electoral base by recommending that people knowing other
languages should be allowed on municipal bodies, and disregarding the
literacy clause for electing the village boards.  While their
resolutions were not accepted, the Congress slowly came under the
influence of Goan intellectuals who began to demand political autonomy
for Goa, then under Portuguese rule.  By 1926, Dr Antonio Salazar took
over as the Prime Minister of Portugal and the Republic came to an
end. His fascist regime called off the Provincial Congress
in 1931. The last elections to elect parliamentarians under the
Republic were held in 1925.

## Education Lays the Foundation

However, education got a sudden impetus with the establishment of the
Republic, which upheld the principles of liberty, equality and
fraternity. Goans were put on par with white Portuguese, at least
constitutionally. This created a sense of identity among the Goan
Christian community and they started enrolling their children in
Portuguese schools. On the other hand, Christianity was abolished as
the state religion, which ended discrimination on the grounds of
religion in public institutions, including schools. Since Hindus could
also be rightfully part of the administration, Hindu enrollment in the
schools began even in the New Conquests. Several privately-run Marathi
schools sprung up all over Goa. Within a decade, by 1910, student
enrollment had increased by 63 per cent. By 1920, it shot up by 149
per cent. While about 600 students attended the Lyceum school in
Portuguese, more than 26,000 Marathi students were enrolled to the SSC
Board of the government of Maharashtra.[^2]

[^2]: Coutinho Verissimo; Goa’s History of Education: A Cast Study of
Portuguesde Colonialism, Loyola University, Chicago (1974)

However, by 1926, the Republic came to an end and the economist
Antonio de Oliveira Salazar took over as the Prime Minister of
Portugal. The *Carta Organica* issued by Salazar for the state of India
in 1926, the Colonial Act promulgated in 1930, and subsequently the
New Constitution of 1933 incrementally curtailed the civil liberties
that people of the colonies enjoyed during the Republic, including the
*Estado da India*. Goans were reduced to second-class citizens in their
own country. But this did not kill the spirit of democracy which Goans
had achieved through education. Two things began to grow in tandem in
Goa: the opening of more private educational institutions, and the
emergence of the freedom movement of Goa. The seeds of the movement
for independence of Goa were laid down in the schools by patriotic
teachers, taking inspiration from the writings of fearless
journalists, such as Luis de Menezes Braganza, known popularly as the
Tilak of Goa, Bharatkar Hegde Desai, etc. This was followed by the
movements led by leaders, such as Dr T B Cunha of the outspoken and
fearless Goa Congress Committee, and Purushottam Kakodkar, with his
silent movement of the Goa Seva Sangh. The regular churning of the
thoughts of freedom through schools, periodicals, and group
discussions exploded in the form of a ‘community bomb’ on 18 June,
1946, when Dr Ram Manohar Lohia sparked off his fiery Civil
Disobedience Movement in Margao.

In 1920, at the primary level, there were 130 government schools and
103 private schools. Out of these, 159 were Portuguese (including 37
private schools), eight Marathi- Portuguese and 66 private Marathi
schools. At the time of liberation in 1961, Goa had 255 Portuguese
schools (including 104 private), four Marathi-Portuguese schools and
167 registered private Marathi schools. In addition, there were 100
unregistered private Marathi schools.

At the time of liberation, over 60,000 students were studying at the
primary level, around 8000 at secondary level and around 1000 students
were enrolled in technical schools.  Around 50 per cent of children in
the age group of seven to 13 were studying at the primary level, and
around 15 per cent at the secondary level in the age group of 11 to 17
years. Education had spread all across Goa, from Canacona to Pernem,
in the Old as well as New Conquests. Also, there were around 25 public
libraries with 1.36 lakh books and 1.32 lakh readers.[^3]

[^3]: Varde Dr P S; History of Eduction in Goa: From 1510 to 1975

In achieving independence through mass non-violent struggles, as well
as some militant episodes, the Press had played a stellar role through
periodicals published from Goa as well as Bombay in Romi and
Devanagari Konkani, Marathi, Portuguese and English, besides
periodicals, such as Kesri of Lokmanya Tilak. India had already
attained independence 14 years earlier and Goans were not only reading
about the democratic functioning of institutions such as the
panchayats, State Assemblies and the two Houses of the Parliament, but
were also experiencing it first-hand in Bombay and elsewhere where
they were either working temporarily, or had settled down.

## Hiccups of the Military Government

With the liberation of Goa on 19 December, 1961, the process of
democracy extended by the Indian Union to Goa and other liberated
Portuguese colonies in India began in earnest.  From 20 January, 1961,
till 8 June, 1962, ‘liberator’ Major General K P Kandeth was appointed
as the Military Governor of Goa for a period of six months. He took
immediate steps to take over the properties in the possession of the
Portuguese, deporting the Portuguese armed forces back to Portugal,
and providing Goans the option of adopting a Portuguese citizenship,
or surrendering their passports. The Indian Citizenship Act, 1955, was
extended to the union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu. Only Indian
nationals were made eligible for jobs in government offices and
state-aided institutions.

Simultaneously, steps were taken to provide solace to Goans. All
political prisoners were given full and complete amnesty, and were
released. The births of the children of Goan freedom fighters, who
were exiled and had to settle outside Goa during the independence
movement, were registered in Goa. The Portuguese had initiated court
proceedings against many locals involved in Kumeri cultivation in
Canacona, Sanguem, Quepem, and Sattari talukas. Some farmers had even
been imprisoned. All such charges were dropped, the farmers were
released, and the collection of fines was stopped.

The military government however underwent lots of teething
problems. Maj Gen Kandeth took prompt steps to withdraw the double tax
on petrol, oil, lubricants like gasoline, and kerosene.  This helped
to lighten the burden of price escalation of goods.  Meanwhile, the
new taxation policy of India was extended to Goa including taxes on
salary and other incomes. On 1 June, 1962, the government scrapped the
earlier permit system introduced for Indians to enter Goa. This opened
the floodgates for migrants to enter Goa and take up jobs that Goans
were not familiar with, including white collar jobs in the
administration.  New jobs were taken up by migrants since Goan youth
were not familiar with English. With the government replacing
Portuguese laws with British-Indian laws, many people who were not
familiar with the British system of administration lost their
jobs. There was a rise in prices of essential commodities like
cereals, potatoes, milk and fish. Foodstuffs became scarce and there
arose a shortage of housing for migrant labour.

The biggest blow was faced by the agriculture sector and the
villagers. The government tried but could not sanction loans to people
whose houses were damaged during the armed battle of Liberation due to
the peculiar land-owning pattern of Goa.  The year 1962 began with a
decline in the market price of paddy. The government tried to give
solace to the farmers by reducing the Communidade rent by 20 per
cent. Also, directives were issued that the rents of Communidade, as
well as private landowners, should not exceed 50 per cent of the
average annual produce. But both, the *Communidade Mazania* as well as
the *Bhatkars* (private landlords) kept violating the directives of the
authorities. Tenants were often evicted by the landlords, in spite of
the government’s efforts to prevent it. The agrarian problem was too
complicated and was left for the new elected government to tackle.

> *“It is a fact that the agricultural sector had lots of problems and
> the agrarian relations were too complicated. The new administration
> did not undertake any reforms for fear of antagonizing the powerful
> landed aristocracy and constituents of communidades (village
> communities). However, efforts were made to mitigate the sufferings of
> tenants and cultivators.* 
>
> *Goans in general did not approve of the cavalier and insensitive
> manner in which the new administration handled the
> transition. Surely, it would have not caused much economic harm if
> the ‘unnecessary’ colonial departments were allowed to continue
> functioning for some time.*
>
> *By forcing the transition thoughtlessly, by refusing to give local
> people time to adjust, the new administration caused much
> bitterness. The government did try to address the problem when those
> who were retrenched on or after 18 December, 1961, were asked to
> report to the government so that they could be absorbed in the
> administration on a priority basis. However, it was too little too
> late.”*[^4]

## The Battle Lines Are Drawn

Amidst this confusion and chaos, 59-year old Tumkur Sivasankar, who
was the secretary in the Union Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply,
took over as the first Lt Governor of Goa, Daman and Diu on 7 June,
1962.[^5] He lived at the Cabo Raj Bhavan for just 15 months, till
September 1963. His task was to put into motion the democratic process
of electing the people to govern the state through a two-tier system:
Panchayats and Municipalities as local self-governing bodies, and the
Legislative Assembly and MPs for the Indian Parliament. He had to
begin by preparing electoral rolls since no such system existed in
Portuguese Goa. He monitored the panchayat elections, but the Assembly
election held soon after that in December 1963 was monitored by his
successor Mulk Raj Sachdev, who took over from him on 2 September,
1963.

[^4]: Dias Remy; Post-colonial Transition to Democracy: Goa
    Perspective, 1961-63
[^5]: Civic Affairs; Monthly Journal of Local Govt and Public
Administration in India, February 1962

After converting the age-old *Gaunkari* system into Communidades, which
were run by the upper strata of the Goan society, the villages were
governed by Camara Municipals.  These were situated in the central
towns of the talukas. Except for Panaji, which was called Camara
Municipal de Goa, all other Camara Municipals were called by the names
of the talukas, such as Camara Municipal de Salcete. They were
converted into municipalities only in 1968 by promulgating the Goa,
Daman and Diu Municipalities Act, 1968. All the village panchayats
were excluded from this. In addition, the Kudchade Municipal area was
constituted by incorporating the Curchorem village panchayat of Kepem
and Kirlapale village panchayat of Sanguem, known popularly as
Curchorem and Sanvordem. Till then, they functioned as Camara
Municipals.[^6]

[^6]: Government Gazette, 8 September 1969, Series I, No 23

Till the time village panchayats were constituted in free Goa, the
villages were governed by Camara Municipals by collecting various
taxes, in addition to the grants they received from the
government. They performed all the civil functions, including the
construction of buildings.

*“Until a few years before liberation, these self-sustaining bodies
were neither elective nor local. Their offices were reserved for
‘Casados’ (married). It was only in 1959 that ‘Juntas de Freguesias’
(rural self-government bodies) were established by the Portuguese
through the Portaria (Notification) No.7575 of 23rd July, 1959,
assigning them the responsibilities of repairs of village roads,
drains, bridges, gutters, street lights, within their jurisdiction…
Thus prior to liberation, there were Panchayats in the villages but
they were not codified and the people used to settle their grievances
themselves rather than approaching the Government authorities. There
used to be a ‘Regidor’ (village headman) in each village who was
entrusted with some of the functions…”*[^7]

[^7]: Citizens’ Charter, Directorate of Panchayats

After Liberation, the President of India promulgated the Goa, Daman &
Diu Village Panchayat Regulation, 1962. The term of the village
panchayat was for a duration of four years, and one seat was reserved
for a woman in each panchayat.  The strength of panchayat members was
decided based on the population: five members for a population between
1,500 to 2,500, seven members for 2,500 to 3,500, and nine members for
a population above 3,500. The first scheduled date of election was 23
September, but the panchayat election was eventually held on 24
October 1962. Incidentally, it was the United Nations Day, the world
organisation that had finally approved the Liberation of Goa,
rejecting the resolution of Western countries led by the USA.

Very little has been written about this first historic panchayat
election held in Goa, especially from the perspective of how Goans,
both literate and illiterate, reacted to it. The Panchayat Raj system
was not yet fully implemented in the rest of India when Goa was going
for the first panchayat election. In fact, while going through the
newspapers in the Central Library, I came across a news report in
*Gomantak* of 30 September, 1962, about the announcement made by Union
Social Welfare Minister, S D Mishra, who told the Rajya Sabha that the
Panchayat Raj system would also be implemented in Kerala and West
Bengal, while it had already been resolved to begin the system in
Bihar, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. However, I found references to how
effectively it was implemented in our neighbouring state of
Maharashtra, soon after the state came into existence on 1 May, 1960.

Before knowing what happened in this first ever election of Goa, it is
important to know the socio-economic background.  While the agrarian
situation in Goa was quite distressed, with landlords evicting their
tenants and not agreeing to half of the agricultural produce being
taken by the tiller, a very strong movement had started seeking the
reform of the agricultural system in the state. Lt Governor T
Sivasankar was confronted with one of the first delegations on 16
August, led by freedom fighters Madhav Bir and Advocate Pandurang
Mulgaonkar of the agricultural wing of the Indian National
Congress. They brought to his notice several instances of landlords
evicting tenants after Goa attained freedom, and demanded total
security to the tenants. While a Mundkar Act was already in force at
that time, the delegation told him that *Bhatkars* were creating hurdles
for the *Mundkars* (tenants) whose houses were damaged due to heavy rain
and needed urgent repairs. The Nerul Kisan Sanghatana also protested
against the Communidade for imposing a tax amounting to half of the
*Khand* (share to be given to Communidade) for growing vegetables.[^8]

[^8]: गोमंतक; 17 ऑगस्ट 1962

The delegation had met the Governor ahead of the historic Goa Shetkari
Parishad held in Panaji on 18 August, 1962. The Congress was not part
of this farmers’ convention. It seems that the Congress delegation met
the Lt Governor to score over the Shetkari Parishad, which was
organised by all the former members and freedom fighters belonging to
the militant Azad Gomantak Dal (AGD). After Goa attained independence
on 28 December, 1961, the AGD members decided to hand over all their
arms and ammunition to the government and dedicate themselves to the
development of Goa. Accordingly, on 10 January, in a grand ceremony,
the AGD members handed over two truckloads of arms and ammunition to
Lt General K P Kandeth that included rifles, stenguns, carbine
pistols, 12 bore guns, gelatin sticks, detonators, grenades, Molotov
cocktail bombs, boxes of bullets, etc.

On 23 February, 1962, the AGD held a convention of its members at
Karmali and decided to dissolve the organisation and form a political
party, the Goa Democratic Party. Dr Ganaba Dhubhashi was elected the
president, with Dattatray Deshpande, Narayan Naik, Tony Fernandes,
Zotico D’Souza, and Atmaram Mayekar as the office bearers. Similarly,
a committee was formed to fight the class struggles for the protection
of the rights and the upliftment of farmers, taxi drivers, teachers,
workers, render, and the Gauda community. The Shektari Parishad was
the first initiative in this regard, of which Adv Vishwanat Lawande
was the chairman.[^9]

[^9]: लवंदे विश्वनाथ; मयेः स्वातंत्र्यसंग्रामाच्या आघाडीवरील एक गाव, पान 127-132

The historic Parishad, held on 18 August, 1962, in the capital city
was presided over by Maharashtra Congress General Secretary Mohan
Dharia, and was inaugurated by ‘Tarkateertha’ Lakshman Shastri Joshi,
president of the Maharashtra Sahitya and Sanskrutik Mandal. The
National Theatre was unable to accommodate the crowd of over 7,000
farmers who had marched from all corners of Goa to attend the
convention. Over a thousand people had to stand on the road, due to
which the organisers had to shift the venue to the Panaji municipal
garden after the inaugural session.

In his inaugural address, Joshi made a special mention of the Gauda
community of Goa: “*Gauda means the one who sets up the Gaunv
(village). He developed our forests. Goa has attained the status of a
rich state because of the contribution of the Gauda community.*”
Stating that democracy means that the state is run by the people, he
also appealed to the farmers to come forward and participate in the
election process, so that “*you can run your own state.*”

Adv Vishwanath Lawade, chairman of the reception committee, observed
in his welcome speech that two-third of Goa’s cultivable land was in
the possession of Bhatkars and Communidades, while one-third was owned
by various religious institutions. He appealed to the landowners not
to exploit the farming community.

The day-long convention from 9.30 in the morning till 5.30 in the
evening passed nine major resolutions, besides a forceful demand to
promulgate the Land to the Tiller Act by abolishing the *Bhatkarshahi*
(Landlordism). While paying tributes to the martyrs who shed their
blood to liberate Goa, the convention fully supported the ongoing
struggles of the farmers from Mayem, Cuncolim, and Ozrim.

The resolutions, in brief, were to:

1. Appoint a Commission to study all kinds of landlordism existing in
Goa, recommend firm steps to abolish landlordism and promote
agriculture on a cooperative basis.
2. Till the Land to the Tiller Act comes into force, tenants were not
to give the *Khand* (share) of more than one sixth of the produce.
3. Promulgate an act not to evict the tenants, and stop the
Communidades’ harassment of tillers, who were tilling the land on or
before December 1960.
4. Stop the system of auctioning and leasing out after a certain
period the cultivable land of Communidades and set up a committee to
distribute the land of Communidades to its tillers.
5. Open stores and depots to provide agricultural tools and implements
as well as seeds and fertilisers at a subsidised price.
6. Enact a legislation to provide concession in repaying the loans and
to provide loans at a low interest.
7. Enact Cooperative Act in order to set up cooperatives and uplift
the standard of living of the farming community.
8. Enact the best land reform and agricultural acts which are in force
in other states of India, especially the “neighbouring states”.[^10]

[^10]: गोमंतक; 19 ऑगस्ट 1962

On the forefront of this Farmers’ Convention were several freedom
fighters, including Zotico D’Souza, Dattatray Deshpande, Narayan Naik,
Dattaram Chopdekar, Tony Fernandes, S A Naik, Raghunath Deshpande,
etc. The local Congress leaders like Adv Mulgaonkar or Bir were not
present at this convention. However, within a month, most of the
leaders of the Shetkari Parishad joined the Congress party and also
achieved some of their demands with the intervention of the Lt
Governor. For this, the Lt Governor set up an advisory council of 24
prominent citizens of Goa, that included freedom fighters, the
Shetkari Parishad leaders, trade union leaders, Congress leaders, as
well as landlords and mine owners, such as Vaicuntrao Dempo, Madhavrao
Talaulikar, etc.

## The Powerless Come To Power

The panchayat elections were announced against this background. But
people did not exactly know how the panchayat system would work, or
what benefits would come their way. Realising that the illiterate
people were confused over the functioning of these self-governing
bodies, Congress leaders, scuh as Adv Mulgaonkar and Shankar Sardesai
took up a village campaign to explain the pros and cons of the
Panchayati Raj system. “*All are Praja (people) and all are Raja (the
King)*” was their attractive slogan. In response, the illiterates came
forward to contest elections, but the majority of the educated and
whitecollar Goans stayed away from contesting as well as voting.

*Gomantak*, Goa’s sole Marathi newspaper, had started the same year and
53-year old B D Satoskar, a veteran Goan writer and experienced
journalist hailing from Marcela village, had taken over as its founder
editor. With his initiative, *Gomantak* played a pioneering role in
educating the Goan masses about the Panchayati Raj system. The
newspaper published articles detailing the powers and functioning of
the panchayats, areas of work, such as hygiene, health, public works,
social welfare, primary education, cultural activities, building
roads, culverts, dredging, etc, how taxation would raise revenue, the
election process, rights of the voters, and how to vote, the
functioning of Gram Sabhas, etc. It was told to the reader in great
detail. For example, ‘All the voters come together and discuss the
problems of the village, which is called the Gramsabha’.

While writing a series of editorials to educate the voters, Satoskar
also moved all over Goa and wrote a special editorial entitled ‘Some
Dangers before Panchayats’, penning down his observations. He observed
that illiterate people were more enthusiastic about the panchayat
elections than the educated Goans. He mentioned that some local
leaders were shying away from elections in order to avoid the blame of
taxing the people to raise revenue. On the other hand, some educated
people had raised a concern that power would go into the hands of
illiterate people. Villages having more old people, with their sons
and daughters settled in the cities for employment, were not
enthusiastic about the elections, but many village youth were
overenthusiastic. He also observed that in some villages rival groups
that were fighting over temples, schools and village dramas were
looking at the panchayats as a new battleground to settle their
scores. In some villages, politicians were exploiting anti-landlord
sentiments to convert the election into a battle fought on caste lines
− Brahmins versus the Bhaujan Samaj.[^11] Goans were battling for
power at the village level for the first time at a time when India was
busy with a war against China. It was a charged environment. After
withdrawals of nominations and the scrutiny of papers, finally only
1,181 candidates remained in the fray for 149 panchayats and 1039
wards, including 93 women. Bardez taluka had the most number of 27
panchayats, while the least number of five were in
Mormugao. Altogether 2.34 lakh voters were supposed to exercise their
franchise on 24 October.

[^11]: गोमंतक; संपादकीय 5 ऑक्टोबर 1962

Surprisingly, 31 panchayats had all their panchas elected unopposed,
including 128 men and 63 women. In Sattari, out of six, five
panchayats were elected unopposed. Most of the panchayats had women
candidates who were elected unopposed, while in many more villages, no
candidate, even in the general category, had come forward to
contest. Most women had shied away from contesting, only 93 women had
remained in the battlefield.

At the same time, some villages were overenthusiastic about the
election. Salcete taluka was in the forefront with a fierce battle
being witnessed in 26 panchayats and 190 wards.  The women of Salcete
too were actively involved. A certain panchayat in Salcete had nine
women in the fray in different wards, not just in the reserved
ward. *Gomantak* also made a special mention of Loliem-Pollem, a border
village of Canacona taluka, from where 22 candidates were contesting
for eight seats!

The story of the village of Mayem in Bicholim taluka, is an inspiring
one. The entire village was declared as an ‘Evacuees Property’ since
it was owned by a Portuguese feudatory, Eurico Noronha. They had a
long drawn-out struggle for the ownership of land, which had continued
even after Goa became part of India.  The Portuguese had left Goa, and
Noronha was still camping in Goa. (The issue had not been fully
resolved till 2021, when this book was published). The villagers, who
were fighting under the leadership of Atmaram Mayekar, a freedom
fighter, decided to contest all the nine seats of the Mayem
panchayat. In collusion with the pro-Portuguese bureaucrats in the
administration, the opponents of the villagers got Mayekar arrested on
12 October, twelve days before the election. Incidentally, their case
was not referred to while compiling the list for providing amnesty.
The enraged villagers marched to the police station, and the Shetkari
Sanghatana leaders sought the intervention of the Lt Governor, but
Atmaram Mayekar could not be released till the central government
issued a fresh list of providing amnesty on 26 January, 1963, the
Republic Day of India.[^12]

Finally, the day of the election arrived. India had refused to
surrender to China. US warships had entered the Atlantic Ocean.  A
first-ever democratic battle of the common man and woman had begun on
24 October, the World United Nations Day, in 118 panchayats where
1,429 candidates, including 93 women were fighting an electoral battle
at 164 booths. Despite the lack of enthusiasm shown by the educated
and wealthy class, around 1.21 lakh (62%) out of a total of 1.95 lakh
adult voters gathered at the polling booths to exercise their
democratic right.[^13] People had lined up at the polling booths even
before eight o’clock in the morning. Women holding small children in
their laps were given preference. Many candidates had put up
hand-written posters beyond 100 meters of the polling booth to attract
the voters. The counting began as soon as the voting ended at five in
the evening. The results were declared the next day.[^14]

The most inspiring result was that of the Mayem panchayat.  In spite
of fielding candidates against Mayekar’s group and managing to keep
Mayekar behind bars, all the nine members of his party got elected by
securing almost 90 per cent of votes.  Mayekar was unanimously elected
the Sarpanch. Mayem, thus showed a new path of democracy to the
citizens of Goa!

It was the beginning of a new democratic era for Goa, which had till
now witnessed only the rule of outsiders, including the Europeans who
ruled over them hand-in-glove with the wealthy landlords and
oppressive tax collectors. A new dawn had arisen on the west coast of
India.

[^12]: लवंदे विश्वनाथ; मयेः स्वातंत्र्यसंग्रामाच्या आघाडीवरील एक गाव, पान 138 
[^13]: Gaitonde Dr Pundalik; The Liberation of Goa: A Participant’s View of History P 186
[^14]: गोमंतक; 25 ऑक्टोबर 1962