---
title: National Mines and Regional Rejects
style: chapter
---

### Chapter 2
# NATIONAL ‘MINES’ & REGIONAL ‘REJECTS’

Before getting into the history of Goan polity, let us learn a bit
more about the presence of national and regional parties in Goa. In
the earlier chapter, we have seen how the Congress party established
itself in Goa after getting completely routed in the first three
elections. The merger of the UGP’s Babu-Willy faction and the
so-called Marathiwadis like Pratapsingh Rane, Dilkhush Desai, Dayanand
Narvekar, and Vasu Paik Gaonkar, led to the Congress emerging as a
strong political force in Goa. For all practical purposes, it was the
union of the MGP and the UGP as well as the Hindus and the
Christians. With Goa attaining statehood and the strength of the
Assembly rising to 40 after the 1989 election, this national party
became the unified front of the regional sentiments of Goa.  The MGP
became a namesake regional party with its leaders waiting for the
‘royal opportunity’ to become ‘loyal soldiers of the Congress’.

The ‘UT Mentality’ (of excessive dependence of a union territory on
the Central Government) has been deeply rooted in Goan politics right
from the day the MGP formed its first government in Goa in 1963. Even
after wiping out the Congress in the first election, the first public
rally of the MGP held in Margao congratulated the Congress government
at the Centre for their victory, claiming that the MGP victory had
strengthened the hands of Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.[^1]
Even before he was sworn in as Goa’s first chief minister, Dayanand
Bandodkar was all praise for Nehru while refuting the Prime Minister’s
allegation that the election had been fought on religious lines.[^2] He
blamed the local leadership of the Congress for their debacle.

[^1]: गोमंतक; हा कौल जनतेचा आहे, 13 डि सेंबर 1963
[^2]: गोमंतक; श्री दयानंद बांदोडकर यांचे पं नेहरूं ना उत्तर, 17 डि सेंबर 1963

While contesting the second Assembly election soon after the Opinion
Poll, Bhau refused to continue the MGP’s alliance with the PSP. “The
PSP got elected in Goa with our support and their MP Peter Alvares
criticised the Congress government at the centre in the Lok
Sabha. Being a Union Territory (UT), Goa cannot afford to oppose the
central government at the Centre,” said Bandodkar.[^3] The PSP lost all
the eight seats it contested independently in 1967. The Socialists
polled hardly five per cent votes, 3033 to be precise. Seven of them
lost their deposits.  Even the sitting MLAs like Jaisingrao Rane (6%)
and Gajanan Raikar (2%) could not make any impact.[^4]

[^3]: राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा, पान 46
[^4]: Election Commission of India

## The Gold Mine of Congress

It was not Shashikala Kakodkar who made the first move to merge the
MGP into the Congress. It was Dayanand Bandodkar.  A little before his
sudden demise in 1973, Bhau had almost finalised the plan to merge his
party into the Congress. Uma Shankar Dixit, the influential union
minister in the Indira government, had succeeded in mediating the
merger. He had agreed to all the three major conditions laid down by
Bandodkar: 1) Elections of the Congress party should be held as per
the advice of Bandodkar; 2) Maximum candidates of the Congress should
come from the *Bahujan Samaj*; and 3) Christians should have
representation in the cabinet.

However, 12 August 1973 turned out to be a calamitous day for Goa, due
to Bhau’s sudden demise. Goa has never witnessed till date such a
funeral. The queue of mourners on the day of the funeral extended from
his Altinho bungalow near the Circuit House right up to the Panjim
Church Square.[^5] More than half of Goa, especially in the villages, did
not cook their meals as usual that day. We, at school, had a holiday,
not joyous but full of tears. The whole state was mourning. The
Congress missed gaining a visionary leader and a statesman!

[^5]: राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा, पान 75-76

There was a valid reason why Bandodkar had laid down those three
conditions. It was because the Purushottam Kakodkar-led Congress was
following the unfair policy of favouring landlords over the *Bahujan
Samaj*. Equally flawed was the policy of fielding freedom fighters who
had no roots among the masses of those respective constituencies.

In 1967, at the Assembly poll held within a month of the Opinion Poll,
Congress did not contest. The national party tried to strike a pact
with the regional UGP, as a unification of antimergerist
forces. However, the talks failed since Dr Jack de Sequeira remained
adamant on not sparing UGP’s strongholds.  Congress was also hesitant
to give a firm assurance that Dr Sequeira would be made the chief
minister. The national party then decided that some of the freedom
fighter party men would try their luck as independents. But this
experiment flopped even more miserably than the previous one. Madhav
Bir in Tivim (polled 869 votes), Pandurang Mulgaonkar in Panaji
(1051), Jaikrishna Shirodkar in Shiroda (857) and Ligorio Cota
Carvalho in Cortalim (1667) fared quite poorly. Former MGP leader and
ex-Speaker P P Shirodkar, who was tipped to be the CM, also lost badly
in Siolim (354) as an independent candidate.

But the Congress was still bent upon its 1963 policy when it contested
the 1972 election, once again to lose all the seats, except Daman. The
freedom fighters who lost were Gopal Apa Kamat in Sattari (1170),
Vishwanath Lawande in St Andre (1205), Prafull Priolkar in St Estevam
(934), Telo Mascarenhas in Cortalim (1018), and Anthony D’Souza in
Mormugao (2816).[^6] 

[^6]: Shirodkar Dr P P; Who’s Who of Freedom Fighters

And once again, a prominent landlord and another mighty mine owner
were given Congress tickets. This time from Pernem, Raghuraje
Deshprabhu was fielded, but could not poll more than one third of the
votes. MGP candidate Jaisingrao Abasaheb Rane, not from Pernem,
defeated him by polling 62 per cent votes. Mine owner Modu Timblo in
Margao fared even worse.  He lost his deposit by polling hardly 17 per
cent of the votes, finishing in third position. Anant alias Babu Naik
made his debut in the Assembly on the UGP ticket by polling more than
half the votes, 54 per cent.[^7]

[^7]: Election Commission of India

But this policy changed with the UGP and the MGP leaders taking over
the Congress during Indira Gandhi’s regime. The UT mentality obviously
helped the Congress to get firmly rooted in Goa as the national party
ruled India for 52 long years, from Nehru in 1947 to Manmohan Singh in
the first decade of the 21st century, till the Narendra Modi-led BJP
took over in 2014. The major break in between was the BJP rule for six
years under Atal Bihari Vajpayee from 1998 to 2004, when BJP’s Manohar
Parrikar formed two consecutive governments in Goa. Otherwise, India
had witnessed minor stints like the post-Emergency Janata rule in
1977, with V P Singh and Chandrashekhar in the ‘90s, and Atal Bihari
Vajpayee (BJP) for six days, as well as H D Deve Gouda and I K Gujral
in the late ‘90s. These phases did not have any impact on Goan
politics.

The national scenario certainly had an impact on Goa politics in terms
of the Congress being the most powerful party in the country, with its
blessings and financial support as the central government. Despite
facing a series of rebellions as well as defections and changes in
their governments, the Congress continued to wield significant
power. Even after Goa attained Statehood in 1987, it remained
dependent on the Centre till the 10th Finance Commission of 1992, when
the Centre cut down financial assistance drastically, in accordance
with the Gadgil- Mukherjee formula. In fact, the BJP Chief Minister
Manohar Parrikar was the first politician of Goa to prove with his
expertise in financial management that Goa could be economically
self-sufficient. The Congress till then had not come out of the ‘UT
Mentality’, Even today, Goan politicians are demanding a Special
Status for Goa on the lines of the North-Eastern states for financial
privileges.

## The Era of Defections

Defections in Goa did not begin in 1990, when Pratapsingh Rane’s
Congress government was toppled within 77 days. The first defection
was engineered by Bhausaheb Bandodkar in July 1970 when his government
was pushed into a minority due to a revolt by seven MGP men including
two ministers and the deputy speaker. He sailed through the vote of
confidence by splitting five UGP men from their party and getting them
on his side. None of the rebels and defectors from the two parties won
in the next election held in 1972.

The second revolt was faced by Shashikala Kakodkar in 1979, following
the violent students’ agitation for 50 per cent bus concession. Two
young MGP legislators, Dayanand Narvekar and Dilkhush Desai, moved out
first, reducing the MGP strength to 13. The Congress had 10 MLAs, but
Shripad Kunkolienkar had no voting right as his election petition was
pending before the Supreme Court. The Janata Party had three
legislators. An independent candidate from Daman was supporting the
MGP and another independent Narayan Fugro from Diu was the
Speaker. Fugro saved Shashikala-tai by casting his veto in support of
the government when there was a tie during the voting on the
budget. But then the Law Minister Shankar Laad also joined the rebels
and pushed the Tai government into a clear minority.  Then Tai managed
to convince Prime Minister Morarji Desai, and got President’s rule
imposed on 27 April 1979. She did not allow the rebels to form an
alternate government. But the next election of 1980 ended the MGP
rule. The rebels joined the Congress and that party came to power.

The Congress then ruled Goa for the entire decade uninterrupted. The
party did face a major revolt led by Dr Wilfred de Souza in September
1983. He split the party with eight MLAs in protest, as his demand for
change in the leadership of CM Pratapsingh Rane was not heeded. Dr
Willy, who was then the PWD minister in the Rane government, went
ahead and formed the Goa Congress party. This was in the background of
the threeday retreat in Goa of the CHOGM (Commonwealth Heads of
Governments’ Meet) hosted by India from 23 to 29 November 1983. To
facilitate the hosting of the retreat of 39 heads of governments from
all over the world, the Central Government gifted Goa a bouquet of
infrastructural projects worth Rs 430 million, including the Zuari
bridge as well as the CHOGM road from Porvorim to Sinquerim via
Saligao and Calangute, and other facilities.[^8]

[^8]: itsgoa.com and pamphlet of Sangharsh Natya Manch, cultural wing of Progressive Students’
Union

Despite Dr Willy’s clout with a powerful contractors’ lobby, the Goa
Congress lost the 1984 Assembly election, except for Luizinho Faleiro,
who made his debut in the Goa Assembly from Navelim. Though Dr Willy
also lost the election, he along with the support of the MGP and
frustrated Madgavkars succeeded in defeating his arch rival in the
Congress, Babu Naik. Adv Uday Bhembre, standing as an independent,
defeated him in one of the most exciting elections Goa has ever
witnessed till date. The Congress was also weakened with Shashikala
Kakodkar quitting the Congress and staging a homecoming to the MGP on
20 October and later also quitting the MGP to form her own party, the
Bhausaheb Bandodkar Gomantak Party (BBGP). Her fate too was no
different from the Goa Congress.[^9]

[^9]: बेळेकर सुहास; गोव्या तील नि वडणुका, विधानसभा व लोकसभा 1963 ते 2014

The Congress once again swept the 1984 election by winning 18 out of
30 seats and gaining 1.60 lakh votes out of 1.71 lakhs polled by five
national parties including the BJP (contesting 16 seats), CPI (5
seats), CPM (4 seats) and Janata Party (3 seats), which they all
lost). MGP established itself as the opposition, winning eight seats,
besides four independents. The Assembly election was held alongside
the national Lok Sabha poll, which was held in the background of the
assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Riding on a nationwide
sympathy wave, the Congress won 404 seats in the 514-seat Lok
Sabha. In Goa too the party won both the seats (North: Shantaram Naik,
South: Eduardo Faleiro).[^10]

[^10]: Election Commission of Indoa

However, anti-Rane sentiment began brewing within the Congress even as
the mighty Pratapsingh faced a violent agitation for the official
language in 1986. This eventually resulted in Dr Willy coming back to
his party, and Goa attaining statehood, with 40 Assembly
seats. Meanwhile, the Parliament passed the Anti-Defection Act, making
it mandatory for a defecting group to be at least one-third of the
parent party’s strength in the legislature to split from the
party. This development came a little before the 1989 election. There
was yet again a state-wide month-long protest in 1988 against the
alleged molestation of a teenage employee by the then Speaker Dayanand
Narvekar.  This agitation brought all the opposition parties together
as a front to fight the 1989 election.

What was its outcome? The Congress reached the edge of a majority by
winning 20 seats, while the MGP rose to 18.  Rane was in the saddle
once again, but only for 77 days. The toppling of Rane by a group of
seven MLAs began Goa’s most shameful defection era. The most
embarrassing part of this ‘legal defection’ was that the Tenth
Schedule of the Constitution (Anti- Defection Act) had authorised the
Speaker of the Assembly to sit in a neutral position and judge the
legality of defections.  But here, the Speaker Dr Luis Proto Barbosa
himself led the first legal defection to seize the CM’s chair. The Goa
Assembly had to appoint another ‘member of the House’ to decide about
the Speaker’s defection. Dr Kashinath Jalmi, who judged this shameful
act, ruled that the Speaker could not defect. His judgement was also
upheld by the Supreme Court.

However, this new legal weapon of ‘one-third’ provoked a series of
shameless toppling games and rampant defections during the entire
term, primarily sponsored by various groups of builders and real
estate agents. Goa witnessed seven chief ministers in those five
years. Despite this, in the next Assembly election of 1994, the
Congress still managed to emerge as the single largest party by
winning 18 seats in a hung Assembly.  Rane became the CM once
again. But after ruling for three years and seven months, he was
felled again. This time the Congress rebels were also supported by a
four-member BJP group from outside.

In order to control these defections, the Anti-Defection Act was
amended further in 2003, raising the limit of strength from one-third
to two-thirds, or to resign and face a by-election. The professional
defectors, mainly from the Congress, as well as from other parties,
even faced the electorate after seizing the ministerial seat. The
helpless voter finally gave up, but rose once again determinedly in
2012 to send the corrupt, opportunist, selfish, and ‘poor’ Congress of
‘rich’ leaders home. The national party, for the first time since
1980, dipped down to a single digit of nine MLAs. The only viable
alternative then was Manohar Parrikar, whose BJP finally reached the
magic figure of 21 and ruled Goa for five years.

By 2017, the Narendra-Modi led BJP had established an unbeatable
majority in the Parliament in the Lok Sabha poll of 2014, Parrikar had
become the defence minister of India, the BJP had showered social
schemes with freebies on all sections of the Goan society and had
built a well-knit infrastructure of roads, bridges etc.

Still, in the surprise poll of 2017, Congress once again rose from
nine to 17 seats, pushing the BJP from 21 down to a mere 13, in a hung
Assembly including three each of the MGP, Goa Forward Party, and
independents. Churchill Alemao was the sole NCP man elected. Parrikar
was surely stunned by this Ajeeb behaviour of the Goan voter.

Sitting in a dejected mood with his journalist friend, Parrikar said:
“There is no other option other than sitting in the opposition now.”
Suddenly his mobile rang, he looked at it, requested his friend to
excuse him and went inside his room. Emerging after ten minutes in an
upbeat mood, he told the journalist: “We are forming the government.”
Now it was the turn of his friend to be stunned. The impossible had
turned possible. Amit Shah moved into action, Nitin Gadkari flew down,
a couple of helicopters landed in Goa, and Manohar Parrikar became the
Chief Minister once again.

The national leaders had managed to persuade Vijai Sardesai of the GFP
as well as Sudin Dhavalikar of the MGP, and the independents, to
support the Hindutva party, which they had earlier sworn not to
support. Both, Sudin and Vijai, became the deputy chief ministers
while their four colleagues became ministers. Independents Rohan
Khaunte and Govind Gaude also joined the cabinet.

The first one to jump out and seize a ministerial berth was ‘loyal
Congressman’ Vishwajeet Rane. He quit minutes after taking oath as the
MLA, a historic record he created on 16 March 2017. In this episode,
Parrikar as well as his successor Dr Pramod Sawant engineered further
defections; not to form the government, but to weaken the
opposition. By October, two more Congress MLAs, Subhash Shirodkar and
Dayanad Sopte, resigned and got re-elected on BJP tickets.

After Parrikar’s sad demise two years later, when Sawant took over on
27 March 2019, two of the three MGP legislators: Babu Azgaonkar and
Dipak Prabhu Pauskar merged their twothird group into the
BJP. Coalition partner Sudin Dhavalikar was dropped. By July 2019, 10
more Congress legislators formed a group of two-thirds and joined the
BJP. As a result, all the three ministers of the Goa Forward Party and
independent minister Rohan Khaunte were dropped. The coalition
partners were dumped, probably because they had started acting ‘over
smart’. The BJP rose from 13 to 27 while the Congress was reduced from
17 to five and MGP from three to one. Yet another unique kind of
defection episode in India’s political history!

TOPPLINGS & CMS OF GOA: 1963 TO 2021

As of the time this book was being penned, a total number of 15
legislators from the Congress and the MGP have quit their parties in
order to ‘strengthen’ the hands of Modi-ji. And still, the Congress
continues to be in the prime position and the main opposition in the
state as Goa goes for a fresh poll in 2022.

The following table shows how many chief ministers have become victims
of rebellions and who ditched their own parties to become chief
ministers. However, this list only gives indications of what must have
happened during these toppling games. Not only the Congress, but BJP
leaders like Manohar Parrikar also became CM for the first time by
engineering defections in the Congress camp.

The history of defections in Goa is so ‘rich’ that I may have to write
a special book on it. Just as the tip of the iceberg, here are some
random facts and figures. The ninth Assembly of 1999 had 25
professional and habitual defectors out of 40. From 1990 to 2002,
after which started the BJP era, Goa had 13 chief ministers in three
Assemblies. In these 12 years, defections took place 21 times and the
number of detectors was 80. That does not mean 80 MLAs defected. A
large chunk among them had defected at least twice in these 12
years. The BJP, for example in 1999, had 10 MLAs in the
beginning. When the then CM Manohar Parrikar had suddenly dissolved
the Assembly prematurely, the saffron party had 11 defectors with
them, more than their own party men. Similarly, in 2017, people had
elected only 13 saffronites.  Today, as this book goes to print and
Goa goes for elections, the BJP has 27 MLAs. More than double![^11]

[^11]: Goanews.com; Defector is most powerful, 20 April 2002

## Christians ‘Love’ BJP

The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) is the umbrella organisation of
the Sangh Parivar. The BJP is its political wing, which is supposedly
expected to work on the lines of the RSS ideology. Vimarsh Prakashan
of New Delhi has recently published a book ‘Future Bharat: An RSS
Perspective’. It is a compilation of lectures delivered by RSS
Sarsanghchalak Mohan Bhagwat in New Delhi from 17 to 19 September
2018. During these lectures, he was asked a question: *“In the ‘Bunch
of Thoughts’, the Muslim community has been addressed as enemies. Does
the Sangh accept these views?”*

Bhagwat gave a lengthy reply as to why Muslims need not fear but must
love their motherland, the culture, and our common ancestors, who were
all Hindus etc. With regard to the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’ written by M S
Golwalkar in 1960, Bhagwat said: 

> *“.... In that book, we have given only his thoughts that were
> contemporary in nature. You read that book in which you will never
> find such things… Times are changing; the condition of the
> organisation also changes; so also, the manner of articulation
> changes. We have already got permission from Dr Hedgewar to bring
> about necessary changes…”*[^12]

In the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’, there are three different chapters on
‘Internal Threats to India’, titled ‘The Muslims’, ‘The Christians’,
and ‘The Communists’. In one of the paragraphs on ‘The Christians as
the Internal Threat’, the book states:

> *“.... Such is the role of Christian gentlemen residing in our land
> today, out to demolish not only the religious and social fabric of
> our life but also to establish political domination in various
> pockets and if possible all over the land … Jesus had called upon
> his followers to give their all to the poor, the ignorant and the
> downtrodden. But what have his followers done in practice?.... Are
> we not aware of the atrocious history of Christian missionaries in
> our own country, of how they carried sword and fire in Goa and
> elsewhere? There is the story of ‘Saint’ Xavier, who used to
> experience the highest joy of his life when he used to see the new
> converts trampling upon their former gods and goddesses, razing
> their temples to the ground and insulting their own parents and
> elders who remained Hindus.*
>
> *So long as the Christians here indulge in such activities and
> consider themselves as agents of the international movement for the
> spread of Christianity, and refuse to offer their first loyalty to
> the land of their birth and behave as true children of the heritage
> and culture of their ancestors, they will remain here as hostiles
> and will have to be treated as such.”*[^13]

[^12]: Bhagwat Dr Mohan; Future Bharat- An RSS Perspective, P 87-89
[^13]: गोळवलकर मा स; विचारधन (पाचवी आवृत्तीः डि सेंबर 2001), पान 177

Did the BJP manage to come to power by remaining hostile towards the
Christians in a Hindu-majority Goa?

BJP leader Manohar Parrikar always called himself a proud Swayamsevak
of the RSS and started building the BJP in Goa in the background of
the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi issue.  Before that, the Jan Sangh
and the BJP had made three attempts since 1972 (excluding the combined
effort with the Janata Party), but could not garner more than two per
cent votes in any of these elections. The saffron party also did not
gain more than two per cent votes in the seven seats it contested in
the 1989 Assembly election. But in the 1991 Lok Sabha election,
Parrikar polled 18 per cent votes in North Goa and rose up to the
third position, just two per cent less than the runners-up
MGP. Similarly, in South Goa, Shripad Naik polled 14 per cent votes to
get to the third position.

In the 1994 Assembly election, by aligning with the MGP, the BJP made
a debut in the eighth Assembly by winning four seats: Manohar Parrikar
(Panaji), Shripad Naik (Madkai), Digambar Kamat (Margao) and Narhari
Haldankar (Valpoi). It then rose to 10 seats in 1999, 17 seats in 2002
and dropping to 14 in 2007. But the Hindutva party could acquire
majority seats of 21 in the 40-member House only when the so-called
‘enemies’ of the RSS were made the friends of the BJP, especially the
Christian community and the Muslim minorities. Till then, the
saffronites were either leading the governments with the help of the
Congress defectors or with the help of small parties available for
political auction like the MGP, UGDP etc.

In 1994, the BJP emerged with a bang, filling the toothless opposition
space occupied by the MGP. Parrikar exposed a multi-crore power scam
by the then Power Minister Mauvin Godinho in the Rane-led Congress
government. (That alleged scamster Mauvin Godinho is now a senior
minister in the BJP government!) With a mere one-tenth of the strength
of the 40-member Assembly, the BJP also supported from outside the Dr
Wilfred de Souza’s defector-government, formed in 1998.  The Hindutva
party’s first love in the defection game was Dr Willy, the Goan
politician known for his ‘Christian politics’.

His 10-member splinter group – the Goa Rajiv Congress – also included
two other Christians MLAs, Carmo Pegado and Fatima D’Sa, besides
Dayanand Narvekar, Subhash Shirodkar, Chandrakant Chodankar, Deu
Mandrekar, Pandurang Bhatale, Pandu Vasu Naik and Jagdish Acharya. It
lasted for only four months. His three ministers – Dayanand Narvekar,
Subhash Shirodkar and Pandu Vasu Naik – along with deputy speaker Deu
Mandrekar split from the government that was supported by the MGP from
inside and by the BJP from outside. The BJP was then quick to demand
President’s Rule.

With this second defection of ‘homecoming’, Luizinho Faleiro became
the new Chief Minister of the Congress, but for not more than
two-and-a-half months. Within 68 days, two of his ministers, 76-year
old Deu Mandrekar (MLA for the third time), along with independent
John Manuel Vaz withdrew their support, pushing the Faleiro government
into a minority. Dr Willy once again staked his claim with the support
of the MGP and the BJP. But suddenly the BJP made a volte face,
changed its strategy, and refused to support the Willy government.
President’s Rule was imposed on 12 February 1999.[^14]

[^14]: goanews.com

For four months till the next Assembly election, Goa witnessed one of
the best administrations, run by Governor Lt Gen (Retd) J F R Jacob
with only two advisors: Goa-born senior bureaucrat in Delhi Albano
Couto and M N Buch.

After pulling the rug from under Dr Willy’s feet, a similar strategy
was played by BJP’s master strategists late Pramod Mahajan and Goa’s
Manohar Parrikar, when a fresh Assembly election was announced in
1999. They responded positively to the initiative taken by mine owner
Auduth Timblo of Fomento and prolonged the alliance talks with the MGP
till the last minute.  Then, just a couple of days before the last day
of nominations, they broke off the alliance talks on flimsy grounds,
throwing the MGP completely off guard. The most powerful opposition
party till yesterday had to literally hunt for candidates. The
last-minute-ditching strategy worked once again as the BJP turned the
tables. The saffron brigade rose from four to 10 while the MGP reduced
from 10 to four. Parrikar announced proudly: *“Though Lord Rama is our
national hero, my idol in politics is Lord Krishna”*, obviously
referring to *Krishna Niti* described in Hindu mythology.

Despite these serial defections, especially by the Congressmen, the
Congress still rose to 21 seats, with Luizinho Faleiro once again
becoming the Chief Minister. This was the first time the Congress had
achieved the magic figure of 21 in the 40-member House. But Faleiro
was not confident about his own party colleagues. He engineered
defections in all the three smaller parties in order to ‘strengthen’
the Congress.  Both UGDP MLAs Suresh Parulekar and Jose Philip
D’Souza; Ramakant Khalap and Prakash Velip out of four from the MGP,
and Francis D’Souza from the GRC, leaving its leader Dr Willy all
alone, joined the Congress. But even the strength of 26 could not
sustain Faleiro for more than six months. His archrival Francisco
Sardinha split from the Congress with 10 more members, to seize the
throne on 24 November 1999.

The BJP this time participated in the coalition government of
defectors, except that Manohar Parrikar did not join the
cabinet. Sardinha’s Goa People’s Congress had seven Christian
defectors: Sardinha, Alex Sequreira, Victoria Fernandes, Arecio
D’Souza, Francis Silveira, Francis D’Souza, and Mauvin Godinho, whose
power scam the BJP had exposed just two years earlier. But Sardinha’s
defector government buckled within nine months due to Parrikar’s
Krishna Niti. In October 2000, Parrikar engineered defections in
Sardinha’s GPC as well as more defections in the ‘original’
Congress. Khalap and Velip defected for the second time within nine
months from the GPC while Ravi Naik, Shaikh Hassan Haroon, Babu
Azgaonkar, and Sanjay Bandekar split from the Congress to join the
BJP.

Parrikar’s 14-member cabinet included two Christians and one Muslim:
Filipe Neri Rodrigues, Jose Philip D’Souza and Shaikh Hassan
Haroon. But the defection activity had not stopped. Sensing trouble
from within his cabinet to topple his one-and-a-half-year old
government, Parrikar surprised the whole opportunistic political world
of Goa. He suddenly moved into action on 27 February 2002 by convening
an emergency cabinet meeting at the International Centre Goa (much
closer to the Raj Bhavan than the Panaji Secretariat) and rushed to
the Governor at Cabo, recommending dissolution of the two-anda-
half-year old Assembly.

Though his letter claimed that the premature dissolution was
recommended by the cabinet, the cabinet members were totally in the
dark. They heard about it from us: the media. Opposition Leader
Luizinho Faleiro alleged that the dissolution was not on the official
agenda of the cabinet. But it simply didn’t matter to the Governor
since who mattered as per the Constitution was the Chief Minister, not
his council of ministers. The Governor was bound to implement the
cabinet recommendation. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was heading the BJP
government at the Centre at this moment and Mohammed Fazal, a BJP
loyalist, was the Goa Governor. With the Centre’s blessings, Parrikar
managed to continue as a Caretaker Government with his entire cabinet,
until a fresh election was held on 30 May 2002, coincidentally on Goa
Statehood Day![^15]

[^15]: rediff.com; Goa Assembly dissolved, Parrikar to continue as
caretaker CM, 27 February 2002

After that the BJP changed its entire political strategy. It had
realised that the Hindutva religious card didn’t work in
Goa. Parrikar, during his short stint, had performed very well,
especially in financial management by presenting some brilliant
budgets and raising revenue locally by filling the loopholes. He had
also filled the public treasury through non-tax revenue, which had not
been revised by his Congress predecessors for two to three
decades. Parrikar thus made Good Governance his main plank and pushed
his Soft Hindutva strategy under the carpet. This proud RSS
Swayamsevak had skilfully revamped his image as a minority-friendly
political leader.  In 1999, the BJP had fielded only four candidates
from the minorities, in the Christian-dominated constituencies of Old
Conquests, especially in Tiswadi, Mormugao, and Salcete talukas:
Socorro Fernandes (St Cruz), Anthony Fernandes (Cortalim), Julio
D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina (Navelim).  Among them, only two
candidates rose up to runner-up position: D’Silva in Cuncolim by
polling 26 per cent votes and Jina in Navelim with 14 per cent votes
against Luizinho Faleiro who polled 75 per cent votes.

However, in the 2002 Assembly poll, the BJP fielded eight minority
candidates (out of 39) in the four talukas of the Old Conquests:
Francis D’Souza (Mapusa), Tony Rodrigues (Taleigao), Shaikh Hassan
Haroon (Mormugao), Anthony Vaz (Cortalim), Jose Pinheiro (Loutolim),
Laxmi Gonsalves (Benaulim), Julio D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina
(Navelim). Out of these, Francis D’Souza not only got elected, but
remained as the BJP MLA for four consecutive terms till 2017. After
his sad demise, his son Joshua is now a BJP legislator. Rodrigues
(25%) and Shaikh Hassan (28%) stood at second position while Vaz (27%)
and D’Silva (20%) held the third position.[^16]

[^16]: Election Commission of India

Parrikar became the CM once again on 3 June 2002, with the BJP rising
to 17 seats in a hung Assembly. It was one seat more than the
16-member Congress. With the BJP still ruling at the Centre, he formed
the government with the support of the three-member UGDP, two-member
MGP and Independent Filipe Neri Rodrigues. He had four Christian
ministers: Francisco D’Souza from the BJP, Babush Monserrate and
Mickky Pacheco from the UGDP and Filipe Neri, the independent. After
Mickky was dropped from the cabinet in June 2004, Matanhy Saldanha
from the UGDP was accommodated. To strengthen his government, Parrikar
engineered defections once again, with Madkaikar quitting the MGP,
Babush quitting the UGDP and Isidore Fernandes from the Congress. They
were made ministers, increasing the strength of the Christian
ministers by two more.[^17]

[^17]: goanews.com

Then in some dramatic incidents witnessed in the Assembly, including
the physical eviction of Filipe Neri by the police from the House, the
Parrikar government was reduced to a minority within two years and
eight months. It began with Parrikar dropping Babush from the
ministry. That led to Madkaikar and Isidore quitting the BJP. Then
Mickky joined the BJP and quit it in one day, claiming that he
believed in front-stabbing, not back-stabbing. The coalition partners
− the MGP and Filipe Neri Rodrigues − withdrew support to the
government. While the newly sworn in Congress government led by
Pratapsingh Rane was in trouble due to disqualifications and other
vexing issues, the three-time BJP MLA Digambar Kamat came to his
rescue. Claiming that he had been suffocating in the Hindutva party
all those years, he quit the BJP. It is known as the Ghusmat episode
in the history of Goan politics!

This was the time when China had emerged as the major client for Goan
iron ore, including the low quality rejects.  Illegal mining had
slowly started rising in Goa while three-time BJP MLA Digambar Kamat
was the Minister for Mines. Auduth Timblo of Fomento Mines moved into
action, took his ‘political revenge’ on the BJP for breaking its
alliance with the MGP in 1999 and put a stop to the uncertainty over
the survival of the Rane government. Digambar continued as the Mines
Minister.

The government also faced a historic agitation in 2006 against the
disastrous Regional Plan framed by the Town and Country Planning
Minister Babush Monserrate. The construction lobby of land grabbers
had gone on a rampage, and people across Goa were up in arms. Bowing
before the public outcry, Babush was dropped and the disastrous
Regional Plan was scrapped. The Rane government survived till the next
Assembly election.

In the 2007 election, the BJP slipped down to 14, the Congress rose to
16 in a hung Assembly once again. With illegal mining booming, mines
minister Digambar Kamat rose to become CM and Parrikar became the
Opposition Leader for five long years, without any toppling or
defection taking place despite a hung Assembly. The BJP fielded only
four Christian candidates, of which only Francis D’Souza won. Agnelo
Silveira (Taleigao), Antonio Caído (St André) and Milagres Gonsalves
(Cuncolim) lost.

Riding over the rampant illegal mining, which was later estimated by
Justice Shah Commission to be to the tune of Rs 35,000 crore rupees,
Kamat impressed the Goan populace by presenting an alternate
environment-friendly Regional Plan prepared by a Task Force led by
Goa-born internationally famed architect Charles Correa. Kamat also
scrapped the five Special Economic Zones, which were exposed as a real
estate land scam. However, on the other hand, the unabated destruction
of the hinterland and even the Sahyadri Ghat continued, until the
Supreme Court banned Goa’s mining activity in 2012. Parrikar, as the
chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, had exposed the illegal
mining steered by Kamat.

The opposition leader also led the agitation against Medium of
Instruction when Kamat continued government grants to the 127 English
medium primary schools run by the Church. It was directly in
contravention of the government policy of 1992 not to give government
grants to English medium schools. Accordingly all the Church schools
had switched over to Konkani medium.  But no government had followed
its preventive clause not to permit new English medium private primary
schools. Private English schools kept mushrooming with the blessings
of the double-standard politicians. This duplicity resulted in the
increasing trend of parents sending their children to English medium
primary schools. This exodus drastically affected the strength of the
Konkani schools run by the Church. After running Konkani schools for
two long decades, the Church-run Diocesan Society of Education finally
decided to switch back to the English medium. Digambar Kamat assured
to continue their salary grants. A state-wide agitation began against
this, led by Konkani leaders, who joined hands with the Sangh Parivar.
Parrikar also joined the agitation of the Bharatiya Bhasha Suraksha
Manch (BBSM) to oppose the Church.

In spite of this, the Church came in support of Parrikar and his BJP
in the 2012 Assembly election, in order to teach a lesson to the
corrupt and defector-driven Congress, which was taking the Christian
community for granted.

In the 2012 election, the BJP strategically contested only 28 seats,
by supporting the Mickky-led Goa Vikas Party in Salcete, as well as
three independents. In addition, the Hindutva party fielded six
Christian candidates. All of them won: Francis D’Souza (Mapusa),
Michael Lobo (Calangute), Glenn Ticlo (Aldona), Carlos Almeida
(Vasco), Matanhy Saldanha (Cortalim) and Nilesh Cabral
(Curchorem). The BJP won 21 seats, besides the two GVP MLAs, Mickky
Pacheco (Nuvem) and Caitu Silva (Benaulim) as well as the two
independents it had supported: Avertano Furtado (Navelim) and Benjamin
Silva (Velim).  The Hindu-Christian ‘Bahujan formula’ of Bhau
Bandodkar worked well for the BJP too!

Since then, the BJP in Goa has been holding its fort with the help of
Christians. In the last election held in 2017, the BJP slipped down to
13 while the Congress rose from nine to 17, once again in a hung
Assembly. Out of these 13, seven MLAs were Christians. Perhaps it is a
record that the saffron party has created in India, where the majority
of its legislators belonged to the minority community. Both the BJP
and the Church were soft to each other. Due to this and the BJP being
in power at the centre, Parrikar managed to fly the tricolour flag on
the banks of river Mandovi on the Independence Day, once again by
using the crutches of the power-hungry regional outfits. He moved down
to Goa, leaving the influential defence ministry of the country, to
hold the reins of power

After Parrikar’s sudden demise in March 2019 due to pancreatic cancer,
Dr Pramod Sawant, the only BJP cadre politician left in the
legislative party, succeeded him. In order to strengthen its position
in the Assembly, the BJP continued to engineer defections in the
Congress as well as the MGP. While the saffron party is 27-member
strong today, 15 among them are Christians.

Since 2002, the Hindutva party has succeeded in electing almost 12
Christian legislators. From time to time, nine more Christian MLAs
have defected and held the saffron lotus on their shoulders with
pride. In addition, almost 10 more Christian MLAs have split from the
Congress and ruled hand-in-hand with the Hindutva party.

Due to this, the BJP in Goa had to also face the wrath of its parent
organisation, the RSS. Goa witnessed a state-wide revolt by the RSS
cadres, led by its state-level Sanghchalak Principal Subhash
Velingkar, on the eve of the 2017 Assembly election. To avoid
displeasing the Church and the Christian community, Parrikar followed
his predecessor Digambar Kamat in continuing salary grants to the
Church-run English schools.  The agitation started once
again. Velingkar converted the BBSM into a political outfit − the Goa
Suraksha Manch (GSM). He vowed to finish the “anti-national” BJP!

The GSM lost all the five seats it contested, securing barely 10 per
cent of the votes. But the RSS cadres certainly succeeded in defeating
many BJP candidates by diverting their votes to the winning
candidates, no matter which party they belonged to. It even included
Babush Monserrate in Panaji and Vijay Sardesai in Fatorda. The GSM was
created only for those hardcore BJP sympathisers, who would never vote
for the Congress or other anti-BJP outfits. It had a huge impact. A
total of 12 BJP bigwigs lost their elections. It included the sitting
chief minister Laxmikant Parsekar, ministers Rajendra Arlekar, Dyanand
Mandrekar, Dilip Parulekar, and Mahadev Naik, sitting MLAs Kiran
Kandolkar, Subhash Naik, Ganesh Gaonkar and Subhash Phaldesai as well
as former MLAs Damu Naik, Prakash Velip, and Vijay Pai Khot.

Velingkar later on admitted in a ‘Straightforward’ interview with me
that *“our priority in the 2017 election was to defeat the BJP, not to
get the GSM elected. We did not give a public call to divert our votes
to the winning candidate. Our RSS cadres are intelligent enough to
know what is the priority and act accordingly.”*[^18]

[^18]: goa365.tv; ‘Straightforward’ with Subhash Velingkar, 28 January 2018

As a result, the BJP was left with only four from the original cadres
of the party including Dr Pramod Sawant, Sidharth Kuncolienker, Rajesh
Patnekar, and Milind Naik. Pandurang Madkaikar and Pravin Zantye were
lifted from the Congress.  On the other hand, all the seven Christian
MLAs of the BJP were re-elected. Only Arthur D’Silva in Curtorim lost
to Alex Reginald Lourenco of the Congress. And in most of the seats
where the BJP did not have Christian candidates, the Congress won. It
looked like the Church had played the Krishna Niti of Parrikar. It
worked, as the BJP eventually came to power and the continuation of
salary grants to the Church-run English medium schools is now no
longer an issue.

Velingkar, the political Guru of Parrikar, decided to take ahead his
task even after his disciple had died and a fresh bye-election was
announced for Parrikar’s vacant Panaji seat on 19 May 2019. Velingkar
himself entered the fray against BJP’s Siddharth Kuncolienker. His
defeat was really pathetic.  The RSS rebel leader could garner hardly
three per cent votes; 516 to be precise. He lost to the BJP as well as
the Congress and announced his retirement from election
politics. Babush Monserrate, the victorious Congress MLA, is now in
the BJP while his wife Jennifer is a minister!

This is the way the BJP is surviving today in Goa. By having almost 16
old and new Congressmen as their MLAs from among its 27, it has become
the Bharatiya Janata Party of the Congress.  And with 15 Christian
MLAs, the Hindutva party has also become the party of majority
Christians. The enemies described in the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’ have
become friends of the Hindutva party and the friends like the RSS
rebels have become the arch enemies of the BJP.

These are the dynamics of the Ajeeb politics of Goa!!!

## The Regional ‘Rejects’

The Opinion Poll proved that when Goans want to protect their
language, culture, ecology or identity, they think beyond
politics. But when they think about politics, they don’t support the
regional parties espousing the regional sentiments. For that matter,
not a single regional party could come to power or even strengthen its
roots in Goa’s political soil in the last 60 years. On the contrary,
they were uprooted by the Goan voters. All such experiments have
failed miserably.

The only regional party that could come to power and rule Goa for 16
long years uninterruptedly was the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party. But
was it a regional party in its true sense? In fact, the MGP was formed
to eliminate Goa’s regional Konkani identity by merging it into a
Marathi state.

On the other hand, the United Goans Party, which fought for a separate
state, could never cross 12 seats in the 28-seat Goa (Daman and Diu
were one seat each). In fact, in the third election held in 1972, the
UGP slipped down to 10 seats while the MGP rose to 18. That was the
last election for the United Goans Party. The UGP then simply
disappeared from Goa’s political scenario as its tall regional leaders
like Dr Jack Sequeira and Anant alias Babu Naik preferred to join the
national parties like the Janata Party and the Congress respectively.

The MGP continues. But after losing the battle of making Marathi the
official language in 1986-87, the party became a ‘workshop’ for the
Congress, supplying candidates to them as and when required. Its
prominent leaders kept on jumping out of the sinking ship to try their
luck with the national parties.  The BJP, in the meanwhile, captured
MGP’s dedicated vote bank, making the Lion completely powerless. And
now Sudin Dhavalikar, its new supremo, has turned the roaring Lion
into a begging Lion. The ‘party of individuals’ shamelessly negotiates
power-sharing in the hung Assemblies. We can unhesitantly call it a
‘stepney’ for Congress as well as the BJP, with no ideology of any
sort except greed for power.

Nationally, Goa has been at the forefront, fighting issues of regional
identity and protecting its ecology for the last 50 years. It began
with pollution at Zuari Agro Industries and protecting interests of
traditional workmen like Render (toddy tappers) and Ramponkar
(traditional fishermen) in the 70s, a militant students’ movement and
violent Konkani movement in the 80s, opposing allegedly polluting
projects like Nylon 6,6, alignment of Konkan railway, and destruction
of the coastal belt due to five-star tourism in the 90s and state-wide
agitation against the destructive Regional Plan as well as diversion
of Mhadei river in the first decade of the 21st century. And now, it
is fighting illegal mining and casino-drugs-driven tourism as well as
opposing three linear projects – double-tracking of a rail line from
Karnataka’s Hospet to Vasco, laying down a 400-kV power transmission
line through the Sahyadri range in Mollem and four-laning of the
existing NH 4A.

THE FATE OF REGIONAL PARTIES

| No | Party                         | Polls | Contested | Candidates | Won | % |
|----|-------------------------------|-------|-----------|------------|-----|---|
| 1  | United Goans Party            | 4     | 102       | 35         | 34% |   |
| 2  | Gomant Lok Pokx               | 3     | 16        | 00         | 00  |   |
| 3  | United Goans Democratic Party | 5     | 65        | 9          | 14% |   |
| 4  | Goa Vikas Party               | 4     | 18        | 2          | 11% |   |
| 5  | Goa Suraj Party               | 3     | 11        | 00         | 00  |   |
| 6  | Save Goa Front                | 1     | 17        | 2          | 12% |   |
| 7  | Goa Forward Party             | 1     | 4         | 3          | 35% |   |
|    | TOTAL                         | 21    | 233       | 51         | 22% |   |

But none of these regional sentiments, except the anti-merger
movement, translated into a robust regional party that would challenge
the mighty national parties like the Congress and the BJP. On the
contrary, the following table clearly shows the pathetic condition of
the regional parties in Goa, from 1963 till 2017 elections:

The table does not include the MGP since it is not a regional party in
its true sense of regionalism. It also does not include the parties
formed due to rebellions in the parent parties. And, of course, the
question simply doesn’t arise to include the parties (or the groups)
formed by defectors to topple the governments of the parent parties,
to seize power. The table has listed only those regional parties which
were formed much before elections, independently, with regional
aspirations, as an alternative to the national parties.

**UGP**: The only regional party that was overwhelmingly supported by the
people of Goa was the Dr Jack Sequeira-led United Goans Party. It
actually contested only the first three elections, from 1963 to 1972,
displaying an impressive voting percentage between 30 to 38 per
cent. Babush Monserrate, in 2017, revived the party and contested two
seats. He won from Panaji, but his so-called associate Ramakant Borkar
was in the sixth position with a mere seven per cent of the votes.

None of the other regional outfits could cross 21 per cent votes (UGDP
in 2002 election with ten candidates won three seats). The only
exception is the Goa Forward Party, which polled 35 per cent of votes
in 2017. But it had fielded only four candidates, and three of them
emerged victorious.

In fact, except for the UGP, none of these regional parties had aimed
at coming to power on their own. While the magic figure to form the
government is 21 in the 40-member Assembly, no regional party, since
1989, even contested more than half of the seats. Most of the time,
they contested less than ten seats, sometimes just one or two
seats. This itself is ample proof that these regional parties were not
formed to lead the regional aspirations of the Goans and rule Goa. The
sole and whole intention was to share power with the big national
parties.

Precisely this is the reason they could win hardly 51 seats out of 233
seats all these parties contested from time to time.  And if we
exclude the UGP era, we realise that the rest of the six parties won
only 16 seats out of 131 seats they contested in 17 different
elections in nearly three decades. That’s pathetic.

**GLP**: Gomant Lok Pokx was one regional party that had evolved through
people’s struggles like Render (toddy tappers), Ramponkar (traditional
fishermen), factory and mining workers, motorcycle pilots etc. It was
demanding the continued implementation of the Tenancy Act. It was also
espousing the cause of ‘Sons of the Soil’, which had migrants as its
target. The party was led by two former MPs, Adv Amrut Kansar and
Erasmo Sequeira as well social activists like Victoria Fernandes,
Matanhy Saldanha, Celso Dias, Antonio Fernandes, etc.

The party contested two Lok Sabha elections of 1984 and 1991, but
polled around three-four per cent votes which came down to less than
one per cent in the second contest. In the 1989 Assembly election, the
GLP contested only 11 seats, that too in the Old Conquests, like
Tivim, Calangute, Saligao, Panaji, Taleigao, St Cruz, St Andre,
Loutolim and Cortalim. Prashant Naik among them had withdrawn from
Canacona at the last minute. The overall percentage was not more than
12 per cent in 11 places. Only Victoria could garner around 4500 votes
and lost to Congress MLA Victor Gonsalves. All others lost miserably.
In 1994, they once again contested only four seats including Erasmo
Sequeira and Matanhy Saldanha, but could not poll more than three per
cent votes.

**UGDP**: While the GLP experiment had failed, in 1994, another regional
experiment emerged across Goa: the United Goans Democratic Party. It
was originally formed at the behest of Dr Wilfred de Souza to
embarrass his rival, the then chief minister Ravi Naik. Raghurai
Tamba, a Panaji-based businessman, had taken Ravi head-on some
gelatine-related issue. He was the founder president of the
party. Churchill Alemao, as he claims, did not found the UGDP. In
fact, after quitting the Congress to topple Rane, this ‘18-day chief
minister’ was hunting for a party to contest from.[^19]

[^19]: Interview with Adv Radharao Gracias

The UGDP accommodated him, while fielding 20 candidates in the 1994
poll. It had two former MLAs as the candidates: Luis Proto Barbosa
(19%) and Radharao Gracias (41%). Both of them lost to the Congress,
in Cortalim and Loutolim respectively. But in the first attempt
itself, three MLAs were elected by defeating Congress bigwigs:
Churchill Alemao beat Monte Cruz in Benaulim, Antonio Gaonkar grounded
Francisco Sardinha in Curtorim, and Arecio D’Souza defeated the then
GPCC president Shantaram Naik in Cuncolim.

The party however was found to be more effective in the
Christian-dominated constituencies of the Old Conquests. Four more
candidates faired quite well: Nazario Pinto (34%) against Luizinho
Faleiro in Navelim, Simon Caido (19%) against Carmo Pegado in St
Andre, Filipe Neri Rodrigues (19%) against Manu Fernandes in Velim and
Shaikh Muhammad Akbar (12%) against Digambar Kamat of BJP in
Madgao. Also in Curchorem, Luis Diniz polled 17% votes against Domnic
Fernandes. But Tamba, the president, could not even mobilise one per
cent votes in Panaji. Similar was the really pathetic condition of
other candidates in Pernem, Dhargalim, Pale, Shiroda, Sanguem, Quepem
and Canacona in the New Conquests as well as Vasco and Fatorda in the
Old Conquests.

The UGDP then decided to take five-term Congress MP Eduardo Faleiro
head-on in the 1996 Lok Sabha poll. Churchill Alemao on the UGDP
ticket defeated him, after which he resigned as the Benaulim MLA. In a
bye-election held on 11 October 1996, his brother Joaquim Alemao was
elected from Benaulim. This victory made Churchill popular throughout
Goa, including in the New Conquests. He was pulling crowds of Hindus
as well as Christians and Muslims in the Old as well as New Conquests,
even in the interiors of Sattari. For the people, he was a
long-awaited messiah.

But the non-Congress governments of H D Deve Gowda and I K Gujral at
the centre could not last for long and fresh general elections were
announced in 1998. UGDP MP Churchill lost this election to the
Congress as well as the BJP candidates.  The dejected Churchill struck
a deal and joined the Congress along with his brother Joaquim and
Arecio D’Souza. He and Arecio also got elected in Benaulim and
Cuncolim in the 1999 Assembly election.

By this time, two activist lawyers of Salcete, Anacleto Viegas and
Radharao Gracias, had taken over the control of the UGDP. The party
fielded 15 candidates, polled 15 per cent votes and also got two MLAs
elected: former MLA Suresh Parulekar from Calangute and Jose Philip
D’Souza from Vasco.  Radharao contested from Benaulim but lost the
battle to his former colleague Churchill. Similarly, another lawyer
friend and former MLA Herculano Dourado also lost to Congress MLA
Mauvin Godinho in Cortalim. The party candidates could not even save
deposits in 12 of the remaining 13 seats.

After that the UGDP became a party to strike deals with some wealthy
ambitious politicians to raise funds, with which serious candidates of
the party were trying their luck. It worked well in the 2002 Assembly
poll. Out of 10 candidates it fielded, two wealthy and ambitious
politicians got elected: Babush Monseratte from Taleigao and Mickky
Pacheco from Benaulim, who defeated Churchill. In the bargain, Matanhy
Saldanha from the party cadre also got elected from Cortalim. Radharao
however once again lost the battle against Congress MLA Alexio
Sequeira in Loutolim. Some former MLAs also tried their luck with the
UGDP, but lost, like veteran UGP MLA Teotonio Pereira in St Andre,
ex-minister Monte Cruz in Fatorda, and ex- MLA Victor Gonsalves in St
Cruz.

By the end of the term, Babush had travelled to the BJP and then
Congress to grab ministerial positions in both the governments. Mickky
had formed his own UGDP (Secular) while staunch anti-Congressman
Matanhy had joined hands with BJP’s Manohar Parrikar while remaining
in the party.

In the 2007 election, the UGDP lawyer-duo struck new deals with
Congress rejects including Babush Monserrate, who won in Taleigao. His
wife Jennifer also entered the election arena from St Cruz to score in
the third position. Matanhy Saldanha lost to Mauvin Godinho once again
while ex-MLA Prakash Phadte lost in Mayem. Joseph Sequeira in
Calangute and Dr Jorson Fernandes in Cuncolim lost too. The others
were simply negligible in their performance.

The 2012 election was so pathetic for the UGDP that none of their
seven candidates were known politicians and none of them could score
well. The total percentage was hardly six per cent. In fact, their
Pernem candidate Santosh Mandrekar set a new record of gaining the
lowest number of votes: 50. The party did not contest the 2017
election. Now for the forthcoming 2022 election, its president Dr
Jorson Fernandes has joined the Trinamool Congress, with due
‘permission’ from the UGDP supremos: Radharao Gracias and Anacleto
Viegas.

**GOA FORWARD**: On the eve of the Assembly election 2017 and on the eve
of India’s Republic Day, on 25 January 2016, a new regional party came
into being: the Goa Forward Party. The core slogan was Goem, Goenkar,
Goenkarponn (Goa, Goan, Goan Ethos). It was floated by Vijai Sardesai,
an independent MLA from Fatorda who was denied Congress ticket in
2012. He mobilised the best political brains of South Goa, made
eminent educationist and political analyst Prabhakar Timble the
President and entered the fray on an anti-BJP plank.  After a series
of alliance talks with the Congress failed, the GFP fielded four
candidates. Barring Velim, GFP won three seats: Vijai Sardesai
(Fatorda), Jayesh Salgaoankar (Saligao) and Vinod Palienkar (Siolim).

However, when the time came to form the coalition government, GFP
leader Vijai Sardesai made a 360 degree turnaround and surrendered to
the mighty central leaders of the BJP, who were running the government
at the Centre.

‘Professional negotiator’ MGP also joined the cabinet besides two more
independents. In protest, GFP President Prabhakar Timble resigned from
the party. Other social activists like Mohandas Lolienkar, Prashant
Naik, Dilip Prabhudesai, Saiesh Palondikar etc. however stood behind
Vijai. The GFP also became a partner in the BJP-led National
Democratic Alliance (NDA) at the national level.

As has been narrated in the earlier section on defections, the GFP was
finally dropped from the government in July 2019.  Since then, Vijai
Sardesai claims to be hard-core anti-BJP once again. He has tried
repeatedly to have a pre-poll alliance to defeat the BJP ‘unitedly’,
after which he also tried to align with Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool
Congress. He initially agreed and then backed out from the offer of
merging the GFP into the TMC and began fresh talks with the
Congress. Meantime party MLA Jayesh Salgaokar resigned and joined the
BJP, while the working president Kiran Khandolkar, a former BJP MLA,
crossed over to the TMC. However, in the bargain, the five-year old
regional outfit has faded out its shining colours of Goem, Goenkar,
Goenkarponn. The party supposedly of regional aspirations has proved
to be yet another ‘negotiator party’ of personal aspirations!

**REVOLUTIONARY GOANS**: Calling itself Uzzo (Fire), a section of youth of
Goa have started gathering around a new political outfit − the
Revolutionary Goans (RG), which began as a social organisation five
years ago. Its fiery speaker Manoj Parab has been pulling large
crowds, especially in the Old Conquests and the tourism
belt. Utilising social media effectively, the RG has now entered the
electoral fray under the banner of the Goa Suraj Party. It has
introduced a Person Of Goan Origin (POGO) bill, which they want to be
passed by the Goa Assembly. They are primarily targeting the influx of
migrants and want all the government facilities, schemes, policies,
and programmes limited to the people of Goan origin. They also demand
the scrapping of the 15-year domicile clause.

The POGO bill defines a person of Goan Origin as 

> *“a person who is or whose either parent or grandparent were born in
> Goa prior to 20 December 1961 or who had a permanent habitation in
> Goa prior to 20 December 1961 and who were citizens of India
> post-liberation irrespective of nationality or passport they hold
> currently.”*

The RG wants cent per cent jobs in government and private
establishments, possession of Communidade land, EDC loans and
subsidies, as well as shops and properties in government
establishments only for the persons of Goan origin.

> *“RG will fight tooth and nail any sort of discrimination against
> Goans, which is already being witnessed. This is aimed at promoting
> and encouraging vote bank politics and making Goans irrelevant. Such
> discrimination against us in issuance of ration cards, aadhar cards,
> voting cards, giving them spaces to do business as well as
> residences, also jobs, has resulted in such frustration among the
> son of the soil that there has been a virtual exodus of Goans from
> Goa, thus leaving greater scope for an increased influx of migrants
> into Goa.”*

RG also opposes migrants encroaching on government and Communidade
lands while also blaming migrants for spreading various types of
diseases, and their involvement in criminal activities. Their official
pamphlet does not denounce Goans who are also involved in such
illegal, unhealthy, or criminal activities.

Also another distinct feature of the RG is that the party has evolved
through a social organisation they set up five years ago and has also
encouraged Goan youth to take up different opportunities being made
available due to the changing socioeconomic conditions of Goa.

These two chapters have tried to highlight the unique aspects of Goan
politics from 1963 till date, with the Ajeeb character of the Goan
voter, the politician, as well as the Goan polity. The rest of the
book will try to explore the root causes behind this kind of politics,
which seems stranger or Ajeeb than the rest of India. With the BJP
government trying to enforce the Bhumiputra Adhikarini Bill and the
brand new political outfit the Revolutionary Goans pursuing an ethnic
movement for the “Sons of the Soil Only”, this book will also try and
dig into history to perceive who is the Bhumiputra of Goa, the Goan
who has migrated, or the migrant who is settled in Goa. It will also
try to show how Goan politics, since the ancient times of its first
settlements till date, has been moving around just one distinct
component of Goa – ITS LAND!
