---
title: Opinion Poll Matters, Not The ...
style: chapter
---

### Chapter 12
# Opinion (Poll) Matters, Not The ...

The initial plan of the MGP and PSP was to embarrass the Centre. The
MGP would win the first election, then resign en masse within six
months, face a new election, and once again resign en masse. This was
meant to use the Assembly election as a pressure tactic to merge Goa
into Maharashtra.[^1] But things changed dramatically once the MGP came
to power. Bhausaheb Bandodkar himself, along with the MGP and the PSP
leaders, postponed the agenda of the merger.  Instead he concentrated
on their core agenda of Land to the Tiller and overall development of
Goa in the fields of education, health, agriculture, fishing,
industry, cooperation, and even the development of the Mormugao port.

With the elected government coming to power, the Planning Commission
of India increased the plan outlay for Goa from Rs 95 lakh to Rs 250
lakh. It also sanctioned grants of Rs seven crore for core areas like
agriculture, industry, electricity, education, and health. The number
of primary schools shot up from 292 in 1961 to 840 in 1964 with new
school buildings coming up in the rural areas. Private primary and
secondary schools as well as colleges in the cities were
encouraged. Goa’s health infrastructure at the rural level was
strengthened with six cottage hospitals equipped with 330 beds, 12
rural health centres, and three mobile health vehicles. Potable water
was provided to the interior areas of the New Conquests like Ponda,
Sanguem, Quepem etc., besides the cities. Panchayats brought 1400
acres of fallow land under cultivation, roads were built, bandhs and
buildings were repaired, new wells were dug, irrigation facilities
were provided, three industrial estates were set up, welfare centres
were started for pregnant women, and 58 fair price shops were opened
for ration. Bandodkar also requested the Centre to enhance the plan to
build infrastructure like roads and bridges.[^2]

This did not mean that the crucial issue of the merger was
forgotten. But Bhau was apparently convinced that it was not possible
without the Centre’s blessings. Thus the issue remained in limbo for
as long as Nehru was alive. Panditji left the world on 27 May 1964 and
the ball of the merger began to roll once again.

## Mid-Term To Plebiscite

On 9 June 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri took over as the Prime
Minister of India. With pressure from Maharashtra-based central
leaders like Y B Chavan etc., the Centre began to toy with the idea
of dissolving the Goa Assembly and holding fresh mid-term polls
on the issue of the merger. The proposal started to gain ground
with CM Bandodkar facing a rebellion within his own party to the
extent of his own party men filing a no confidence motion against
him with the help of the opposition UGP. However, in view of the
India-Pakistan conflict that came centre stage, PM Shastri deferred
the decision of mid-term polls. During his Bombay visit on 20
October, he reviewed the Goa situation, where he was also told
that the rebellion was more ‘personal’ than issue-based.[^3] Shastri
officially confirmed the decision to defer the Goa mid-term polls
in the Lok Sabha when PSP MP Hari Vishnu Kamat raised the
issue on 24 November 1964.[^4]

Meanwhile, the issue got a sudden twist with the visit of Railway
Minister S K Patil to Goa in the last week of October 1964. He had
come down to review the party organisation in the wake of the election
debacle in the previous year. Replying to a media question on the
merger during a press conference on 31 October, Patil said that the
Central Parliamentary Board, at its meeting on 7 April, had decided
that Goa would continue as a union territory for 10 years, after which
Goans could decide their status through a ‘referendum’.[^5]

The very next day, on 1 November, Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri
was quizzed by the media in Bombay. He avoided a straightforward
reply, claiming that he could not recollect what the Board had
decided. He recalled a decision taken by the Parliamentary Board
before the Goa election, when Nehru was alive. But with the Goa
election result, he felt that the decision needed to be relooked
into. He also admitted that there were serious differences within the
Congress on this issue, making special mention of S K Patil.

The MGP instantly opposed Patil’s proposal of a plebiscite while CM
Bandodkar rushed to Bombay to meet PM Shastri, pressing for an
immediate merger. The Prime Minister invited him to Delhi to discuss
the matter threadbare while requesting him to defer the MGP decision
to move a resolution on the merger in the Goa Assembly. On 3 November,
in Bombay, Patil contradicted the PM, stating that he had made the
statement in Goa based on a decision at a joint meeting he had with
the PM and Congress President Kamraj before leaving for Goa. “But the
referendum is my personal opinion,” he clarified.[^6]

Surprisingly, the UGP took five days to react to Patil’s
proposal of a plebiscite. Rather than having a press conference
on the issue, Dr Jack de Sequeira preferred to issue a short press
note, terming the decision of a referendum practical and sensible.
This decision will put an end to the number of interpretations
that were attempted, he stated.[^7] *Gomantak*, in its editorial,
called it UGP’s volte face from its original demand of Statehood
for Goa.[^8] PSP leader, S M Joshi termed Patil’s announcement as
a ‘bomb explosion’ on the eve of Diwali, which would have
serious repercussions. The Kannadigas in Karnataka, on the
other hand, welcomed Patil’s announcement.[^9]

Actually, Patil had echoed the opinion PM Nehru had expressed earlier
at an AICC session held in Jaipur on 7 June 1963. When a group of
Maharashtra politicians asked him how the wishes of the people of Goa
would be determined, Nehru had told them: “It will be done through a
referendum.”[^10]

Patil’s game, however, drew flak from his own party colleagues. The
front pages of the newspapers of 4 November were seen with
contradictory statements of Maharashtra’s Congress leaders on the
issue of Goa. The day Patil spoke to the media, his colleagues Defence
Minister Y B Chavan and Maharashtra CM Vasantrao Naik publicly
appealed to the Congress leadership to rethink the Board decision and
immediately merge Goa into Maharashtra. The Goa cabinet met in Goa on
6 November and sent a memorandum to the PM urging the merger, and also
planning a series of mass protests.

The weeklong controversy was put to rest temporarily when the Congress
President Kamraj assured a delegation of Maharashtra Congressmen that
the Parliamentary Board would reconsider its decision.[^11]

CM Bandodkar then organised a massive pro-merger rally in the state
capital of Panaji, following which the state government passed a
private member’s resolution in Goa Assembly on 22 January 1965
demanding Goa’s merger into Maharashtra. The minority UGP walked out
in protest. Following this, the Maharashtra Legislature passed an
official resolution on 10 March 1965. Maharashtra CM Vasantrao Naik
himself moved the resolution, and assured to grant special status to
Goa and protect its identity, religion, culture, language, education,
and social fabric. Not to be outdone, the Mysore Assembly passed a
resolution on 12 March, condemning the Maharashtra Assembly
resolution. It cited the pre-Portuguese rule of South Indian dynasties
over Goa as well as Konkani-speaking settlers in Mysore, besides
geographical, cultural, and linguistic aspects.[^12]

Under immense pressure, the Shastri cabinet decided to hold a mid-term
assembly poll in Goa on the issue of merger.  The Goa Congress
strongly opposed this decision. Goa Congress President Purushottam
Kakodkar, a leading freedom fighter, tried to convince the party
leadership to reconsider the cabinet decision. He didn’t succeed. Then
Kakodkar suddenly disappeared. It made national news. Suspicion was
rife that he may have been eliminated by the pro-merger camp. Three
months later, however, he reappeared, claiming that he had been
meditating at the Sivananda Ashram in Rishikesh.  Meanwhile, PM
Shastri suddenly died in Tashkent, Uzbekistan (in the then Soviet
Union) on 11 January 1966, a day after signing a peace treaty to end
the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War.

The powerful ‘syndicate’ of K Kamaraj of Madras, Atulya Ghosh of West
Bengal, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy of Andhra Pradesh, S Nijalingappa of
Mysore and S K Patil of Maharashtra, which had elevated Shastri to the
PM’s post after Nehru’s death, backed Indira Gandhi for prime
ministership over Morarji Desai. Indira Gandhi took over as the Prime
Minister in late January. A UGP delegation led by Dr Jack de Sequeira
met Mrs Gandhi on 6 May 1966. Goa Congress chief Kakodkar met her, as
well as Congress President K Kamaraj, on 21 June. Both pitched Nehru
and Patil’s proposal for a referendum instead of a mid-term poll, but
Mrs Gandhi declined to reverse the decision of the Shastri cabinet.

Kakodkar then played some astute politics. Though Deputy Prime
Minister Morarji Desai also declined his request, he managed to get an
assurance from Desai that he would not oppose an alternative, if it
was proposed in the Parliamentary Board. S K Patil, now a powerful
member of the ‘syndicate’, moved the vital resolution at the Congress
Parliamentary Board meeting on 3 September 1966. Patil proposed that
instead of a mid-term poll, a ‘different kind of mechanism’ be evolved
to resolve Goa’s merger issue. Neither Morarji Desai, Indira Gandhi,
nor Kamraj opposed it. The Congress didn’t want to call it a
‘referendum’ or a ‘plebiscite’ because of the Kashmir issue.
Consequently, Union Home Secretary L K Singh proposed that it be
called an ‘Opinion Poll’.

The UGP demanded that the MGP government resign so that the referendum
could be conducted in a free-andfair atmosphere. Goa Chief Minister
Bhausaheb Bandodkar gracefully resigned on 28 November 1966, paving
the way for a level-playing field. President’s Rule was imposed on 3
December.

## Who Is A Goan?

Holding a referendum was not an easy exercise for the Centre. The
Constitution of India had no provision to hold a referendum or a
plebiscite. It was happening for the first time in the Indian
Republic. There were referendums held earlier, while Free India was
getting created. But they were held to decide whether people wanted to
join Free India, may it be in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP,
in Pakistan) held on 6 July 1947, in Sylhet (then in Assam and now in
Bangladesh) held on 7 July 1947 or in Junagadh (in Saurashtra,
Gujarat) held on 20 February 1948. Nehru had even proposed a similar
referendum for Goa, Daman and Diu, on 4 February 1949, in the United
Nations Organisation (UNO). But Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio de
Oliveira Salazar rejected it. Much later in 1975, a plebiscite was
held for Sikkim, on 14 April 1975 after Indian troops occupied the
North Eastern state in April 1975.

In tune with the same spirit, the Goa, Daman & Diu Opinion Poll Bill,
1966 was introduced on 21 November and then was moved on 30 November
1966 in the Parliament. Interestingly, it was moved by Deputy Minister
for Home Affairs Vidya Charan Shukla. Union Home Minister Yashwantrao
Chavan, the strongest proponent for Goa’s merger, avoided tabling the
Bill signed in his name. After lengthy debates in both the Houses −
the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha − the bill was passed on 1 December
1966.

The most interesting part of the debate was ‘Who is a Goan?’ The
Maharashtrians, Kannadigas and other migrant Indians living in Goa as
well? Or those lakhs of Goans who had to migrate to Bombay and other
states during the Portuguese regime but had their homes in Goa?
Acharya Kripalani hit out directly at North Goa MP Peter Alvares,
asking if he was a Goan when he had always lived in Bombay. “*Living
in Bombay, if Peter Alvares can contest from Goa, why can’t a Goan
living in Bombay vote in the Opinion Poll?*” he asked. Alvares
admitted that the definition of a Goan was difficult, but also
asserted that Goans living outside Goa and settled in other parts of
India should not be considered as voters.

Deputy Home Minister Shukla finally clarified that Goans living
outside Goa, who could prove they were ordinarily residents of Goa,
could enrol themselves as voters. No minimum residential period was
required to prove that a person was an ordinary resident of Goa. The
House however rejected a series of other amendments including giving
the right to participate in the Poll to all those who had declared
themselves as Goans under the Goa, Daman and Diu Citizenship
Order 1962. This option was given to Goans when the Portuguese era
came to an end.[13]

On the forefront to get outside Goans enrolled as voters was the
UGP. Dr Jack de Sequeira left no stone unturned to achieve this
demand, as most of the Goans working or settled outside were
Christians, who were dead against merging Goa’s identity. The UGP led
delegations to Delhi to meet the MPs of different parties while Goans
opposing the merger formed organisations in Bombay to convince the
‘Bombay voters of Goa’. The party wanted not only Goans settled in
different parts of India but also those settled abroad to be given
voting rights.  The UGP also wanted the facility of postal ballots for
Goans working overseas, including the seamen.

However, during his three-day visit to Goa, Chief Election
Commissioner K V K Sundaram ruled out voting rights for ‘original’
Goans who were permanently settled outside Goa.  Since this statement
created further confusion, next day in Bombay he clarified that such
Goans would be allowed to vote if they convinced the registrar that
they were temporarily staying outside but were ordinarily permanent
residents of Goa. He rapped these Goans asking why they had not
enrolled themselves in the 1963 election. He also rejected the demand
for a postal ballot for the Goan seamen.[^14]

Finally, Goa had 60,321 new voters; some from outside, especially
those working in Bombay. From 3,28,071 in the 1963 election, the
electorate had swollen to 3,88,392, a rise of 16 per cent.

## Mobilising The “Opinion”

The President gave his assent to the Goa, Daman and Diu (Opinion Poll)
Act on 11 December 1966, and the Election Commission of India (EC) was
authorised to hold the Opinion Poll based on the electoral roll
prepared for the Lok Sabha elections scheduled in 1967. The EC
allotted two symbols: a Flower to opt for merger with Maharashtra, and
Two Leaves to retain Goa as a Union Territory. The Opinion Poll, free
India’s first referendum, was scheduled on 16 January 1967.

But the wheels of the Opinion Poll had started moving in Goa much
earlier; soon after the Congress Parliamentary Board had decided to
recommend a ‘different kind of mechanism’ to solve the merger
issue. For the 38 per cent Christian population of Goa, it was a
matter of sheer survival. The Christians stood to lose their
demographic status of a ‘major minority’ forever; they would be
marginalised to a mere 2 per cent minority in a 4-crore strong
Maharashtra, which had just six lakh Christians.  Goa would be
Maharashtra’s 28th district and, with its sevenlakh population, one of
the smallest. Each of the 270 Assembly constituencies in Maharashtra
comprised 60,000 to 1 lakh voters. Each Goa assembly constituency had
just 10,000 to 15,000 voters. Goa would have got a maximum of four to
five assembly constituencies in Maharashtra. For Christians, having
even one constituency of their own would be a far-fetched dream. For
Goan Christians, the Opinion Poll was a do-or-die fight to the finish.

But politics in Goa was not a straightforward Hindu-vs- Christian
equation. Rather, it was the Hindu non-Brahmin Bahujan Samaj versus
the rest; the Hindu peasantry versus the Hindu landlords, and the
latter aligning with the minority Christians. Neither was it a
linguistic battle as is being projected, that is, Konkani versus
Marathi.

I had the opportunity to interview Uday Bhembre, one of the stalwarts
of the Opinion Poll, for three-and-a-half hours on behalf of the
Konkani Bhasha Mandal. He categorically stated: “*The Opinion Poll was
not fought on linguistic grounds.  Konkani-Marathi was just one of the
arguments. It was purely a political battle for Goa’s socio-political
identity.*” He also said that *Rashtramat*, the Marathi daily the
anti-mergerists had launched to reach out to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj,
had the Konkaniwadis as well as Marathiwadis, who were opposed to the
merger.

As the voice of the free media was suppressed during the Portuguese
regime, post-liberation Goa witnessed varied kinds of media
organisations: newspapers, weeklies, and even fortnightlies in Romi
and Devanagari Konkani, Marathi and English besides pre-liberation
Portuguese newspapers. Within three years of Independence, Goa was
publishing 26 newsrelated periodicals.[^15] That number had increased
further when the Opinion Poll was held.

The mainstream news media consisted of mine owner Vishwasrao
Chowgule’s *Gomantak*, founded on 24 March 1962; followed by Dempo’s The
Navhind Times on 18 February 1963; and Novem Goem (1962), a
fortnightly in Konkani written in the Devanagari script. Sot (1962)
and Uzvadd (1963) were weeklies in Romi Konkani. Pradip and Gomant
Vani were dailies in Marathi. The two Marathi newspapers campaigned
for merger. The other publications opposed merger tooth-and-nail.  But
their circulation was very limited, except for *Gomantak* and *The
Navhind Times*.

To reach out to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, a group of young Konkani
writers came together to start *Rashtramat*, a Marathi daily,
in 1964. Their initial effort of ‘crowdfunding’ did not work and they
approached the mine owners. Seven mine owners from the three families
of Salgaocar, Timblo and Gosalia together funded the
venture. *Rashtramat’s* mission was to counter the pro-merger propaganda
of Goa’s then sole Marathi daily *Gomantak*, which was run by the
Chowgules.  Their target readership was the Hindu Bahujan
Samaj. Winning the Opinion Poll with 38 per cent Christians and two
per cent Hindu Brahmins was next to impossible when all the
Christians, due to heavy migration, were not available for voting.

The experiment of *Rashtramat* not only worked but played wonders. It
succeeded in countering the pro-merger propaganda of not only Goa’s
Marathi newspapers but also the newspapers from Maharashtra like
*Pudhari* (Kolhapur), *Sakal* (Pune), *Maharashtra Times* (Bombay) and
*Maratha*, a daily edited by Prahlad Keshav aka ‘Acharya’ Atre, a
firebrand orator and writer. Udaybab’s daily column *Brahmastra* in
*Rashtramat* became a matter of discussion in most of the households,
especially in the New Conquests and among the Hindu Bahujan
Samaj. Udaybab recalls that *Rashtramat* changed its strategy when it
realised that people were in a mood to weigh the issue ahead of the
poll. Rather than outright attacks on the mergerist viewpoint, the
newspaper began logically explaining the issue, putting forth
arguments designed to convince sceptics.  The main thrust of the
public awareness campaigns was around small group meetings, public
meetings, distributing printed material like handbills and displaying
banners as well as holding cultural programmes. The fever of the
Opinion Poll had gripped Goa’s villages and the towns soon after the
official announcement.

Tense moments were witnessed practically every day, with groups on
both sides disrupting meetings, blocking roads and sometimes even
throwing eggs and stones at speakers. Police stations were flooded
with complaints and counter-complaints.  Women complained about
sexually coloured remarks. How much was true and how much was just an
attempt to defame the other side is hard to tell. People from both
sides were arrested.  There were also occasional serious incidents
like beatings and stabbings.

The really interesting battle was on the cultural front.
Maharashtra’s popular Lal Bavtta Kala Pathak led by Shahir Amar
Shaikh, as well as Shahir Sable, enthralled crowds with inspiring
patriotic Marathi songs like *Jai Jai Maharashtra Mazha* (Victory to my
Maharashtra), to generate support for merger.

To counter them, a young brigade of singers, musicians and lyricists
led by Ulhas Buyao entered the arena, styling themselves as the Jai
Gomantak Kala Pathak. Their Konkani campaign songs like *Goenchea
Mhojea Goenkarano*, *Jayat Jage* and *Channeache Rati* long outlived the
movement to become popular folk songs that even today’s younger
generation continues to enjoy.  Interestingly, while the banners
displayed at public meetings by both sides were always in Marathi in
the New Conquests, all the speeches made by even the pro-merger Goan
leaders, were almost always in Konkani.

Another unique campaign came up when the pro-merger camp brought the
‘*padukas*’ (sacred footwear) of the goddess Bhavani, a beloved Maratha
icon, to Goa, in an attempt to polarise voters on religious
lines. Shabu Desai, himself a proud Maratha and staunch MGP supporter
from Cuncolim, rose up in rebellion against his own party. He marched
across the length and breadth of Goa with a *Sangh Pradesh Jyot* (Union
Territory Torch), along with an image of Goa’s own beloved deity,
Shantadurga Kunkolikarin of Fatorpa. Hundreds of youth joined his
march, and devout Goans welcomed the deity, especially in the
Hindu-dominated New Conquests.

## The Lobbies & The Groups

It was an established fact that the small and big landlord class was
strongly against the merger because Maharashtra, among all the states,
had the most revolutionary land reforms in the country. It had begun
producing results with a co-operative movement, which unfortunately
later became the powerful political and financial lobby of *Sahakar
Samrats*. But there was another influential lobby that wholeheartedly
supported the antimerger movement financially, that of the mine owners
in Goa.  The Portuguese regime had granted 893 mining concessions, and
made them deemed owners of the iron ore mines.

Post-World War II, in its reconstruction phase, Japan began importing
low-grade iron ore from Portuguese Goa. Goa’s first mining concession
was granted in 1906, but the mining business actually started booming
only in the last decade of Portuguese rule in Goa.

Soon after liberation, Goa’s iron ore mines were brought under the
ambit of The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957,
governed by the Government of India, to convert these concessions into
leases. Since then, Goa’s mine ‘owners’ have been moving from the
Bombay High Court to the Supreme Court to retain their ‘rights’. The
court case is still pending before the Supreme Court.

When the Opinion Poll was announced, the obvious fear was that if Goa
was merged into Maharashtra, the mines would be governed by the laws
in Maharashtra and India, on par with mines of bigger
states. Consequently, Goa’s mining lobby stood firmly behind the
anti-merger movement, giving it full financial support. *Rashtramat* was
one such venture of seven mine owners. However, there were also some
passionate mine owners like V M Salgaocar, who was playing a
pro-active role to retain Goa’s identity by taking Bhau head-on. My
maternal uncle Ulhas Buyao told me that VM used to personally attend
his musical shows held on open grounds and honour him with garlands of
currency notes if he liked any particular song. On the other hand,
Chowgule’s *Gomantak* was tilting more towards the merger.

In the campaign that Bandodkar led for the Flower, much of the
publicity material as well as the speakers were ‘imported’ from
Maharashtra. The Maharashtra Vilinikaran Samiti took the initiative to
constitute an All-Party Goa Merger Committee consisting of the
Congress, the Praja Samajwadi Party (PSP), the communist parties CPI
and CPI(M), the Jan Sangh, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and
even trade unions like the Congress-run INTUC and the Workers’ Union
of India.

At Bandodkar’s request, 100 volunteers were sent from Maharashtra to
campaign. But the most powerful orators like Acharya Atre, Jayantrao
Tilak, Shirubhau Limaye, S M Joshi, etc., stayed away. Congress leader
and Rajya Sabha MP Mohan Dharia coordinated the campaign from behind
the scenes, while Socialist leaders like Barrister Nath Pai, the MP
from Goa’s neighbouring Rajapur constituency, addressed public
meetings.

The anti-merger camp worked on five different platforms, with hardly
any coordination. The different groups seldom shared a platform, even
though they had no significant political differences; if they came
together at all, it was at the initiative of locals. All the groups
came together in only one large antimerger rally that was held in
Margao.

The Congress camp was not seen in public. Since the party was
vertically divided over the issue in Maharashtra and Goa as well as at
the Centre, party President K Kamaraj imposed a ban on public
participation in the Opinion Poll campaign and told party members to
‘play neutral’. Congressmen in Goa worked only at the cadre level and
campaigned secretively. No major Congress leader from Maharashtra came
to Goa to campaign.

The United Goans Party held public meetings, but predominantly in the
Christian belt. Its leader Dr Jack de Sequeira, however, moved all
over Goa fearlessly and tirelessly, in spite of threats to his life
from opponents. He is believed to have addressed 120 public meetings
in 30 days. Not to be outdone, Dayanand Bandodkar addressed 133
meetings during the campaign.

UGP’s propaganda was centred around Goans losing their identity,
language, and culture. The party’s modus operandi was to get each and
every voter to the polling booth. The UGP did not spare any efforts to
get the maximum number of people, especially Christians, onto the
electoral roll.

The young *Rashtramat* brigade comprised young writers and thinkers in
their 20s and 30s, not politicians. They concentrated their efforts in
the Hindu-dominated New Conquest areas, facing all kinds of
risks. Getting booed, stoned, and even beaten up was all in a day’s
work. But the oratory and logical arguments of these Young Turks made
people introspect and rethink their emotional attachment to becoming a
part of Maharashtra.

## The Teasers & The Arguments

There were quite a few interesting sidelights in the campaign. To run
the private Marathi schools that came up during Portuguese rule,
hundreds of teachers had been encouraged to come to Goa from
Maharashtra, especially in the New Conquest areas. These gurujis were
among the most respected people in their villages.

After liberation, they were all absorbed into government service under
the central government pay scale. It provided them job security as
well as a huge increase in their income. During the Portuguese era,
they were paid by the villagers themselves; sometimes just a handful
of rice from each peasant household, a traditional form of
crowdfunding called mushtifund.

Salaries for teachers in Maharashtra were much lower than the central
government scale. The teachers also wanted to protect themselves from
possible transfers in a huge state like Maharashtra with an area of 3
lakh square kilometres; in comparison, Goa’s 3700 sq.km area seemed
like a comfort zone. Consequently, teachers secretly campaigned
house-tohouse in their localities, endorsing the anti-merger arguments
raised by the *Rashtramat* group.

The major employer of educated youth from the villages, after
liberation, was the Government of Goa, which paid the central
government scale. The Maharashtra government’s pay scale was lower in
comparison. This created a scare among the young educated white-collar
neo-middle class from the Bahujan Samaj, who were often the most
influential people in their localities.

Goans were also concerned about price rise. They were already somewhat
upset over the taxation policy of the Centre in the liberated union
territory. Under Portuguese rule, Goa had been a duty-free port. Taxes
in Maharashtra were much higher than in the union territory.

Liquor was banned in Maharashtra which, unlike Goa, had
Prohibition. This became a bone of contention. To counter the ‘scare’,
Maharashtra chief minister Vasantrao Naik announced in the legislative
Assembly that his government would not extend Prohibition to Goa.

To clear the confusion, the Bombay-based All-Party Goa Merger
Committee and Goa’s pro-merger leaders formally met the Maharashtra
Chief Minister, and requested him to make his government’s policy
clear on the pay scales of government employees, on price rise as well
as Prohibition.  They also demanded a special position for Goa in its
five-year development plan, and for representation in the state
cabinet.  However, no firm assurance, except on Prohibition, came from
the Maharashtra CM.

The arguments were many. Besides the historical background of
Maharashtra kings ruling Goa, it was argued that Marathi had deep
roots in Goan society, from education and culture to literature and
even religious rituals. The anti-merger stance was labelled a
‘Portuguese mentality’.

The anti-merger camp, especially *Rashtramat*, said the merger was an
expansionist action by Maharashtra. They insisted that Goa had a
distinct culture, unique from Maharashtra, and that Konkani was an
independent language. Goans adopted Marathi for education only because
Konkani was suppressed in Goa during Portuguese rule, while Marathi
was able to flourish in neighbouring Maharashtra. To counter the
‘Portuguese mentality’ charge, they overtly exhibited an
anti-Portuguese nationalist spirit with the help of freedom fighters
who opposed the merger.

To cite a few creative arguments, people were asked:

“Do you want to get marginalised from 28 constituencies to a mere
four?”

“Is it possible for your MLAs to become ministers in Maharashtra and
take quick decisions for your welfare?”

“What do you prefer? Going all the way to Bombay to get your work done
at the state headquarters or going to Panaji?”

“In Goa, the MGP has already implemented a ‘Land to the Tiller’
Act. Why do we need to be in Maharashtra to get our land rights?”

And the final masterstroke, which worked wonders: “Don’t you want
‘our’ Bhau (Bandodkar) to continue as chief minister? In Maharashtra,
at the most, he would become a token ‘minority minister’.”

## Three-Day-Long Football Match

Sunday 15 January 1967 witnessed the silence before the storm. Only
the roar of the sea could be heard; no one knew which way the wind was
blowing. The campaign had stopped at 5 pm on the previous day. It was
the eve of a perfect storm.  The ‘outside’ Goans landed in Goa, many
of them on 16 January itself, by air, rail and the most popular and
cheapest means of travel to Goa then, by ship. In fact, two ships
arrived from Bombay, the Champavati and Konkan Sevak. Some Goans flew
in from as far away as Delhi. A few even travelled from African
countries like Kenya and Mozambique.

People lined up at all the 442 election booths much before polling
started at 8 am. Many polling officers had to extend the deadline of 5
pm by two and even three hours. In villages without electricity,
Petromax lanterns had to be brought in for the polling process to be
completed. Not just old people, but even patients and those bedridden
were carried to the booth to cast their votes.

There was an allegation that a large group of underage seminarians
from the Rachol Seminary had voted. In fact, the 1951-born former
Chief Minister of Goa Luizinho Faleiro once admitted publicly that he
had cast a bogus vote – twice – in the Opinion Poll when he was just
15 years old.

The total turnout was 82 per cent. Altogether 3,17,633 people
voted. Just two per cent of the votes were declared invalid. The
enthusiasm of the voters was unprecedented. The subsequent Assembly
election held just after a month, on 21 February 1967, recorded only a
68 per cent turnout, the thirdlowest in 13 Assembly elections till
2017.

VOTER TURNOUT (%): 1963 & OPINION POLL

| Constituency   | 1963 | OP | Difference | Constituency | 1963 | OP | Difference |
|----------------|------|----|------------|--------------|------|----|------------|
| Aldona         | 76   | 97 | 20         | Cortalim     | 73   | 87 | 14         |
| Ponda          | 73   | 96 | 23         | Shiroda      | 62   | 85 | 23         |
| Madkai         | 76   | 95 | 20         | Tivim        | 71   | 85 | 14         |
| Panaji         | 77   | 94 | 18         | Benaulim     | 67   | 84 | 17         |
| St. Cruz       | 82   | 94 | 12         | Margao       | 74   | 83 | 10         |
| Mapusa         | 76   | 93 | 17         | Pale         | 74   | 83 | 10         |
| St. Andre      | 79   | 93 | 14         | Curchorem    | 72   | 82 | 11         |
| Calangute      | 73   | 93 | 20         | Mandrem      | 70   | 82 | 12         |
| Siolim         | 74   | 90 | 17         | Curtorim     | 65   | 80 | 15         |
| Bicholim       | 78   | 89 | 12         | Sattari      | 65   | 80 | 15         |
| St. Estevam    | 77   | 89 | 12         | Canacona     | 72   | 79 | 8          |
| Quepem         | 73   | 88 | 15         | Pedne        | 60   | 76 | 16         |
| Cuncolim       | 63   | 88 | 25         | Sanguem      | 67   | 75 | 8          |
| Navelim        | 70   | 87 | 18         | Mormugao     | 76   | 74 | -3         |


All across Goa people showed enthusiasm. Eleven constituencies
recorded polling percentages of nearly 90 per cent or above. Aldona
recorded the highest: 97 per cent. Not a single constituency recorded
below 74 per cent. This was unprecedented compared to the previous
Assembly election held three years ago or any other election held in
Goa till date. In Mormugao, three per cent less voting than 1963 was
recorded. But in terms of numbers, it was nearly double that of the
previous election, because the number of voters had shot up in this
port town from 11,000 to 21,000. Compared to 8624 polled in 1963,
people who came out for Opinion Poll were 16,000. Obviously, the large
turnout had increased the hopes of both the sides − merger and
anti-merger.

The Goa government had declared a holiday for counting, which began on
17 January. But it continued till the morning of 19 January, much
beyond the scheduled deadline; the afternoon of the 18th. The counting
centre at the Institute Menezes Braganza in the heart of the state
capital, Panaji, was surrounded by armed policemen, including central
paramilitary forces.

At sharp 9 am started Goa’s most exciting ‘football match’.  The local
station of All India Radio (AIR) was continuously broadcasting a live
commentary on the counting. Even then, hundreds of people gathered
round this historic building to listen to the announcements of
booth-wise results over the loudspeaker.

A graph displayed on a huge billboard showed the cumulative percentage
of votes for the Flower and Two Leaves.  It boosted and depressed the
blood pressure of the public for three long days. It was like watching
a gripping football match; a game which Goans dearly love.

The first day’s counting saw jubilation in the mergerist camp, as 11
constituencies from North Goa with 1,21,374 votes (31 per cent) were
taken up for counting. It included five segments from the New
Conquests and six from the Old Conquests, eight of which were MGP
strongholds. These were Pernem, Mandrem, Siolim, Mapusa, Tivim,
Bicholim, Pale, and Sattari. The UGP strongholds were Calangute,
Aldona, and Panaji. At the end of the day, the Flower led by 10,579
votes.  Though the pro-merger public was ecstatic, pro-merger
politicians were disappointed. Two Leaves had got nearly 26 per cent
of the votes in the MGP strongholds, which was not at all expected.

The election authorities could not complete counting the votes on the
second day. Ballots in 13 more Assembly segments were counted. One
again, eight among them were MGP strongholds: St Estevam, Madkai,
Ponda, Shiroda, Sanguem,Canacona, Quepem, and Curchorem. The UGP The
graph shows percentage of votes polled in the constituencies of MGP &
UGP strongholds counted were only five: St Cruz, St Andre, Cuncolim,
Benaulim, and Navelim. By end of the day, all the 16 MGP strongholds
were counted against only eight UGP bastions. In spite of this, Two
Leaves were leading by 7802. Even in the remaining eight MGP
strongholds, Two Leaves garnered 23 per cent of the votes. In
contrast, the Flower got barely 9 per cent of the votes in the five
UGP strongholds. Counting stopped at 8.30 pm, leaving the jubilant
Maharashtrawadi camp nervous.

Two major cities remained to be counted. First, the port town of
Vasco, dominated by a mixed population of workers who had moved from
the New Conquests and migrant workers from outside Goa. The second was
the commercial city of Margao.  It was considered to be the fortress
of Hindu and Christian Brahmins, but it also had many small traders
belonging to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, known as the Bazarkar
Mandalli. Two Christian-dominated constituencies of Curtorim and
Cortalim, both within Salcete, a Christian majority taluka, were also
yet to be counted.

Only Mormugao showed a vertical division of opinion; 49 per cent for
merger and 51 per cent opposing it. It was a complete rout in the
other three constituencies. Two Leaves bagged 93 per cent of the votes
in Curtorim, 89 per cent in Cortalim, and 70 per cent in Margao. Its
graph kept zooming up, increasing the lead to 34,000.

GOA: OPINION POLL VERDICT

| Opinion (Symbol)         | Votes  | %     |
|--------------------------|--------|-------|
| Anti-Merger (Two Leaves) | 172191 | 55.48 |
| Merger (Flower)          | 138170 | 45.52 |
| Margin                   | 34021  | 9.96  |
| Valid                    | 310361 | 79.91 |
| Invalid                  | 7272   | 1.87  |
| Polling                  | 317633 | 81.78 |
| Voters                   | 388392 |       |


*Source: Government Gazette; Govt of Goa, Daman & Diu, Series II, No 42, 21 January 1967*

So certain was the victory for Two Leaves, that Chief Minister
Dayanand Bandodkar did not even turn up at the counting centre on the
third day. His party colleague Atchyutrao Usgaonkar has written that
he found Bhau playing cricket with his grandchildren with a toy bat at
home when he went to visit him soon after the result. Apparently,
Bandodkar had predicted the result.[^16]

It was on 19 December 1961 that Goa was liberated from Portuguese
rule. On 19 January 1967, it celebrated yet another liberation of
sorts, with 55.48 per cent of Goa’s electorate rejecting the proposal
to be part of a bigger state. Nearly half – 45.52 per cent – had voted
for the merger. A little less than 10 per cent – 34,021 votes – had
made the BIG difference.

## Lions Retain Goa

Like any exciting football match, even in the Opinion Poll people
still remember the constituencies of Curtorim (93%), Cortalim (89%),
Margao (69%) and Mormugao (51%), the last four seats which were
counted on the third day. This simply fired up the Identity
graph. Many newspapers also made special mention of some
constituencies in the Old Conquests, like Benaulim (94%) and Cuncolim
(84%). Overall, it was a reverse trend. Unlike 16 seats won by the MGP
in the 1963 Assembly election, the Two Leaves won 16 seats in the
Opinion Poll. Four more from the MGP bastions: Curchorem, Quepem,
Siolim, and Mapusa. The 16 versus 12 ratio of the 1963 election had
turned to 12 versus 16 in the Opinion Poll!

But in reality, this was not enough to win the Opinion Poll.  The huge
amount of votes in the Old Conquests and especially the
Christian-dominated UGP bastions was an expected trend.  It was only
one lakh out of the total 3.17 lakhs of votes polled.  Hardly
one-third. Because even in the 12 UGP seats, the Flower of Merger had
polled nearly half of the votes: 49 per cent. It was not at all a
one-sided affair. And certainly not enough to win the Opinion Poll.

OPINION POLL 1967: VOTES & MARGIN
MGP STRONGHOLDS

| No    | Constituency | Polling | Flower |    | Two Leaves |    | Margin |
|-------|--------------|---------|--------|----|------------|----|--------|
|       |              |         | Votes  | %  | Votes      | %  | Votes  |
| 1     | Curchorem    | 12281   | 5425   | 44 | 6856       | 56 | -1431  |
| 2     | Quepem       | 7664    | 3447   | 45 | 4217       | 55 | -770   |
| 3     | Siolim       | 11451   | 5583   | 49 | 5868       | 51 | -285   |
| 4     | Mapusa       | 11748   | 5859   | 50 | 5889       | 50 | -30    |
| 5     | Sanguem      | 9060    | 4560   | 50 | 4500       | 50 | 60     |
| 6     | Sattari      | 9479    | 4974   | 52 | 4505       | 48 | 469    |
| 7     | Canacona     | 10454   | 5832   | 56 | 4622       | 44 | 1210   |
| 8     | Shiroda      | 10534   | 6369   | 60 | 4165       | 40 | 2204   |
| 9     | St. Estevam  | 11537   | 6903   | 60 | 4634       | 40 | 2269   |
| 10    | Tivim        | 9636    | 6110   | 63 | 3526       | 37 | 2584   |
| 11    | Pale         | 9973    | 6305   | 63 | 3668       | 37 | 2637   |
| 12    | Pedne        | 8271    | 5967   | 72 | 2304       | 28 | 3663   |
| 13    | Ponda        | 11172   | 8082   | 72 | 3090       | 28 | 4992   |
| 14    | Mandrem      | 12760   | 8993   | 70 | 3767       | 30 | 5226   |
| 15    | Bicholim     | 9924    | 7741   | 78 | 2183       | 22 | 5558   |
| 16    | Marcaim      | 10079   | 8408   | 83 | 1671       | 17 | 6737   |
| TOTAL |              | 166023  | 100558 | 61 | 65465      | 39 | 35093  |


OPINION POLL 1967: VOTES & MARGIN

UGP STRONGHOLDS

| No    | Constituency | Polling | Flower |    | Two Leaves |    | Margin |   |
|-------|--------------|---------|--------|----|------------|----|--------|---|
|       |              |         | Votes  | %  | Votes      | %  | Votes  |   |
| 1     | Curtorim     | 13473   | 926    | 7  | 12547      | 93 | 11621  |   |
| 2     | Benaulim     | 11398   | 629    | 6  | 10769      | 94 | 10140  |   |
| 3     | Cortalim     | 11787   | 1376   | 12 | 10411      | 88 | 9035   |   |
| 4     | Cuncolim     | 10854   | 1774   | 16 | 9080       | 84 | 7306   |   |
| 5     | Navelim      | 13416   | 3061   | 23 | 10355      | 77 | 7294   |   |
| 6     | St. Cruz     | 12920   | 4311   | 33 | 8609       | 67 | 4298   |   |
| 7     | Margao       | 10398   | 3241   | 31 | 7157       | 69 | 3916   |   |
| 8     | St. Andre    | 11520   | 3930   | 34 | 7590       | 66 | 3660   |   |
| 9     | Calangute    | 13074   | 4928   | 38 | 8146       | 62 | 3218   |   |
| 10    | Aldona       | 12309   | 4700   | 38 | 7609       | 62 | 2909   |   |
| 11    | Panaji       | 10420   | 4175   | 40 | 6245       | 60 | 2070   |   |
| 12    | Mormugao     | 15726   | 7654   | 49 | 8072       | 51 | 418    |   |
| TOTAL |              | 147295  | 40705  | 28 | 106590     | 72 | 65885  |   |


The surprise swing of votes in the New Conquests played the magic. The
pro-merger camp never expected such a dramatic shift in votes. It was
not Curchorem, Quepem, Siolim, and Mapusa alone where Two Leaves
polled between 50 to 56 per cent votes. Even in Sanguem, the margin of
Flower was hardly 60 votes. It was 50:50. The hard core Lions even in
Sattari (48%), Canacona (44%) as well as Shiroda and St Estevam (40%
each) preferred Two Leaves.

Yet another interesting phenomenon stunned the mergerists.  In the
1963 Assembly election, the anti-merger UGP could not find candidates
to field in Pernem, St Estevam, Madkai, and Shiroda. But in the
Opinion Poll, these four constituencies fetched nearly 13,000 votes in
favour of Two Leaves. It was 40 per cent in St Estevam and even 17 per
cent in Madkai, where Bhau had polled a record 93 per cent votes in
the bye-election.  Compared to the 1963 Assembly poll, 11 out of 16
MGP strongholds went against Bhau and his agenda of merging Goan
identity into Maharashtra. The only huge rise was in Ponda, 63 per
cent more. Then it was St Estevam (25 per cent more), Sattari (24
more), Pernem (23 more) and Mandrem (mere 3 per cent more). Hard-core
Lions in the rest of the 11 constituencies, mainly the Hindu Bahujan
Samaj, tore the petals of the Flower into pieces.

And in the 12 UGP strongholds, the percentages of Two Leaves surpassed
the UGP votes of 1963 everywhere. Cuncolim (39 per cent more),
Curtorim (35 more) and Benaulim (27 per cent more) were at the
forefront. This was a clear indication that the anti-merger trend was
almost a state-wide phenomenon. It was neither Hindu-Christian, Old vs
New Conquests, nor Hindu Brahmins versus Hindu Bahujan Samaj.

## The Agony And The Ecstasy

It may have been with a slender margin of 10 per cent, but Goans had
opted to retain their distinct identity. The promerger camp was
fuming. To keep the situation under control, the Lt Governor imposed
Section 144 CrPC throughout Goa for seven days. People celebrating the
victory were lathi-charged and tear-gassed. Two truckloads of people
were detained.  Dayanand Bandodkar humbly accepted the people’s
verdict. But he also told the press: “*Today, we have lost the battle,
but not the war. I am sure we will win the war. We lost because the
pro-merger camp was not united.*”

But he did not take the war ahead. In fact, in the newly constituted
Assembly of 1967, the MGP supported the resolution urging the Centre
to grant statehood for Goa. It was passed unanimously. But to actually
gain statehood, Goa had to wait for two more decades. After Konkani
was made Goa’s official language, the Congress government led by Rajiv
Gandhi granted statehood to Goa on 30 May 1987.

The Opinion Poll proved Nehru’s contention that Goans were indeed
Ajeeb. In the first Assembly election held in 1963, the Goans wiped
out the Congress and elected the MGP, representing the Hindu Bahujan
Samaj, with 16 seats. The UGP got 12 seats. In the 1967 Opinion Poll,
Goans defeated the MGP’s cause of merger. This time, 16 constituencies
voted against the merger, and only 12 for.

But when a fresh Assembly election was held three months later, on 28
March 1967, the same Goans voted MGP leader Bhausaheb Bandodkar back
to power, once again with 16 seats.  The ‘victorious’ UGP camp was
split into two groups due to internal differences between Dr Sequeira
and Dr Alvaro de Loyola Furtado. Dr Sequeira’s UGP was back, but once
more as Leader of the Opposition, with only 12 seats. The Congress
didn’t even contest.

Chief Minister once again, Bandodkar attended a felicitation function
in Sangli a few months later. There, a local leader asked him at an
informal get-together: “What made you lose the Opinion Poll when you
are so popular?” The CM instantly replied with a smile: “Bhau (me)
made me lose the Opinion Poll”. He explained how his opponents had
exploited his personal popularity to create a false narrative and
defeat the pro-merger point of view. Ajeeb logic of Bhau to justify
the victory of independent-minded Goans in the Opinion Poll!

The Opinion Poll, the only plebiscite held in the country, is an
object lesson in Indian democracy. It simply cannot be equated with an
election to the Assembly or Lok Sabha, where parties or individual
candidates matter. Opinion is different. To sort out vexed public
issues, a properly conducted referendum is the only solution. The
country needs to learn a lesson from Goa!

The Opinion Poll also set an electoral culture in Goa. It made people
think and vote. Since then, the culture continues.  By and large, they
never vote blindly or by falling prey to the usual electoral tactics
of caste, religion, money, or muscle power.  People know that they can
make the situation upside down if they think and vote. The only
tragedy of Goa’s politics is that the thinking pattern has shifted
from performance to delivery.  It sometimes doesn’t matter if the
candidate is a defector, smuggler, rapist, or highly corrupt, as long
as he “delivers”.  Perhaps educated Goan voters are thinking on the
wrong lines.

1. राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान 23
2. Governor’s Address to the Assembly, 13 January 1964
3. The Navhind Times, 21 October 1964
4. The Navhind Times, 1 November 1964
5. The Navhind Times, 1 November 1964
6. The Navhind Times, 3-4 November
7. The Navhind Times, 6 November 1964
8. गोमंतक, संपादकीय, डॉ सिकैरांची कोलांटउडी, 9 नोव्हेंबर 1964
9. गोमंतक, 2 व 6 नोव्हेंबर 1964
10. Narayan Rajan & D’Cuz Sharon; Triumph of Secularism: Battle of the Opinion Poll in Goa,
P 15
11. The Navhind Times, 8-9 November 1964
12. राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा
13. The Navhind Times, 2 December 1966
14. The Navhind Times, 9 & 10 December 1966
15. गोमंतक; 14 जानेवारी 1964
16. उसगांवकर अच्युत; आमचे भाऊ (सहकाऱ्याच्या दृष्टिकोनातून भाऊसाहेब) पान 223
