<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Good Economics for Hard Times</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="galley-rw">
<section class="body-rw Chapter-rw" epub:type="bodymatter chapter" id="copyright">
<h1 class="copyright-title"><a id="page-iv"/><a href="toc.xhtml#toc-copyright">Copyright</a></h1>
<p class="copyright-space">Copyright © 2019 by Abhijit V. Banerjee and Esther Duflo</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Cover design by Pete Garceau</p>
<p class="copyright">Cover copyright © 2019 Hachette Book Group, Inc.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists to produce the creative works that enrich our culture.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like permission to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), please contact permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">PublicAffairs</p>
<p class="copyright">Hachette Book Group</p>
<p class="copyright">1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10104</p>
<p class="copyright"><a href="http://www.publicaffairsbooks.com">www.publicaffairsbooks.com</a></p>
<p class="copyright">@Public_Affairs</p>
<p class="copyright-space">First Edition: November 2019</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Published by PublicAffairs, an imprint of Perseus Books, LLC, a subsidiary of Hachette Book Group, Inc. The PublicAffairs name and logo is a trademark of the Hachette Book Group.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for speaking events. To find out more, go to www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned by the publisher.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Editorial production by Christine Marra, <em>Marra</em>thon Production Services. www.marrathoneditorial.org</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">ISBN 978-1-61039-950-0 (hardcover), ISBN 978-1-5417-6287-9 (ebook)</p>
<p class="copyright-space">E3-20191019-JV-NF-ORI</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>