<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Good Economics for Hard Times</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="galley-rw">
<section class="frontmatter-rw FrontSales-rw auto-rw page-open-left-rw" epub:type="frontmatter" id="praise">
<h1 class="preface-title"><a id="page-a"/><a href="toc.xhtml#toc-praise">PRAISE FOR <em>GOOD ECONOMICS FOR HARD TIMES</em></a></h1>
<p class="noindent">“In <em>Good Economics for Hard Times</em>, Banerjee and Duflo, two of the world’s great economists, parse through what economists have to say about today’s most difficult challenges—immigration, job losses from automation and trade, inequality, tribalism and prejudice, and climate change. The writing is witty and irreverent, always informative but never dull. Banerjee and Duflo are the teachers you always wished for but never had, and this book is an essential guide for the great policy debates of our times.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Raghuram Rajan,</strong> Katherine Dusak Miller Distinguished Service Professor of Finance, University of Chicago Booth School of Business</p>
<p class="noindent">“Banerjee and Duflo move beyond the simplistic forecasts that abound in the Twittersphere and in the process reframe the role of economics. Their dogged optimism about the potential of economics research to deliver makes for an informative and uplifting read.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Pinelopi Goldberg,</strong> Elihu Professor of Economics, Yale University, and chief economist of the World Bank Group</p>
<p class="noindent">“Not all economists wear ties and think like bankers. In their wonderfully refreshing book, Banerjee and Duflo delve into impressive areas of new research questioning conventional views about issues ranging from trade to top income taxation and mobility, and offer their own powerful vision of how we can grapple with them. A must-read.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Thomas Piketty</strong>, professor, Paris School of Economics, and author of <em>Capital in the Twenty-First Century</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“A magnificent achievement, and the perfect book for our time. Banerjee and Duflo brilliantly illuminate the largest issues of the day, including immigration, trade, climate change, and inequality. If you read one policy book this year—heck, this decade—read this one.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Cass R. Sunstein</strong>, Robert Walmsley University Professor, Harvard University, and author of <em>How Change Happens</em></p>
<p class="noindent"><a id="page-b"/>“Banerjee and Duflo have shown brilliantly how the best recent research in economics can be used to tackle the most pressing social issues: unequal economic growth, climate change, lack of trust in public action. Their book is an essential wake-up call for intelligent and immediate action!”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Emmanuel Saez,</strong> professor of economics at UC Berkeley</p>
<p class="noindent">“One of the things that makes economics interesting and difficult is the need to balance the neat generalities of theory against the enormous variety of deviations from standard assumptions: lags, rigidities, simple inattention, [and] society’s irrepressible tendency to alter what are sometimes thought of as bedrock characteristics of economic behavior. Banerjee and Duflo are masters of this terrain. They have digested hundreds of lab experiments, field experiments, statistical studies, and common observations to find regularities and irregularities that shape important patterns of economic behavior and need to be taken into account when we think about central issues of policy analysis. They do this with simple logic and plain English. Their book is as stimulating as it gets.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Robert Solow,</strong> Nobel Prize–winner and emeritus professor of economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology</p>
<p class="noindent">“In these tumultuous times when many bad policies and ideas are bandied around in the name of economics, common sense—and good economics—is even more sorely needed than usual. This wide-ranging and engaging book by two leading economists puts the record straight and shows that we have much to learn from sensible economic ideas, and not just about immigration, trade, automation, and growth, but also about the environment and political discourse. A must-read.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<strong>Daron Acemoglu,</strong> Elizabeth and James Killian Professor of Economics, MIT, and coauthor of <em>Why Nations Fail</em></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>