<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: Foreword</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h1 id="foreword">FOREWORD</h1>
  <p>Whichever way one looks at ‘<em>Ajeeb</em> Goa’s <em>Gajab</em>
  Politics’ one comes to the conclusion that it is an interesting and
  delightful book. If you read it as a person curious about Goa you will
  enjoy the accounts of transition from colonial rule to the later
  continuous assimilation into the Indian Union. If you approach it as a
  student of mythology then the arc of Parashuram’s arrow will engage
  you with its origin myth and with how contemporary politics wants to
  make mythology a hard historical fact. If you are a scholar of
  electoral studies the results of Goa elections, right from the first
  election in 1963 till the most recent in 2017, will continue to puzzle
  you with their unconventional outcomes. If, instead, as a demographer
  you want to examine the consequences of Goa’s in and out migration,
  for society and politics, the book offers many insights.
  ‘<em>Ajeeb</em> Goa’s <em>Gajab</em> Politics’ is a treasure house of
  interesting questions about democracy, demography, and I daresay even
  of demonology.</p>
  <p>What I found fascinating is the little observations that the author
  makes and that are so inviting for students of social science. Let me
  just mention three. In the essay on the Opinion Poll he mentions that
  the teachers imported from Maharashtra, to fill the vacancies in the
  hugely expanded number of Marathi schools that had come up after
  liberation, had secretly campaigned against the proposed merger with
  Maharashtra, i.e., against the state from which they had come, and
  whose culture they carried, because the merger would go against their
  personal interests measured in terms of salary, promotion, and
  transfer. This is an interesting thesis on how and why self-interest
  takes precedence over cultural identity. How would such a dynamic have
  played out in today’s heightened politics of cultural nationalism?
  When does a background culture heightened by political mobilization
  cause people to act against their self-interest when they are required
  to make choices in the public domain? Think of demonetization and all
  that followed.</p>
  <p>Another intriguing issue is the discussion in the chapter on Land.
  The author discusses the phenomenon of ‘negative declarations’ where a
  tenant swears before the Mamlatdar that his or her name had been
  wrongly entered in the I &amp; XIV land records. So instead of
  claiming land rights, given by a philosophy of land to the tiller
  which one thought was going to be a boon to the marginal tiller, we
  find the tenant renouncing their rights for some other gain, one that
  needs detailed elaboration. What is it that outweighs land rights
  given by the tenancy laws? The interesting issue to investigate is the
  set of factors that cause this renunciation of rights. What does it
  tell us about the emerging political economy of Goa? I see this small
  insight on the renunciation of land rights, the negative declaration,
  as a master key to understanding the drivers of change in contemporary
  Goa. Land is the single most important factor that defines
  contemporary Goa. We know this. But it still needs much more study.
  The chapter by Sandesh Prabhudesai, on land, has many suggestions. I
  see it as a good place to begin one’s investigation on the political
  economy of Land in Goa.</p>
  <p>The third observation that I wish to note relates to the
  relationship between the Communidade, as an institution, and the
  Gaunkari system. He describes how the former undermines the latter and
  shows how this happens through the laws introduced by the Portuguese
  authorities. Not only did it change the structure of the village but
  it reassigned rights disenfranchising the subaltern groups within the
  village. This is a huge area of research, not just in terms of the
  respective qualities of the two institutions but also in terms of how
  a colonial mindset and policy regime imposed itself on an ancient
  society. Goa is a prime example of such an imposition which has had
  many negative effects that we still quarrel over. It has also had some
  positive effects but we hesitate to name them. There is, in fact,
  significant interdisciplinary research waiting to be carried on the
  historical encounter of India with Europe. If we look at contemporary
  Goa through the lens of tourism studies, then the encounter produced
  what some have described as colonial chic. Goa, as a cultural and
  social space, sells well. It is chic. See the data on the number of
  tourist arrivals both domestic and foreign to confirm this point. Goa,
  being different from Sindhudurg or Gokarn which are also beautiful
  coastal areas, is an attractive holiday and leisure destination
  because of this Portuguese interlude. If, in contrast, we look at Goa
  through the lens of colonial studies, then it is an interesting case
  of cultural hybridity, different from the French colonies of Algeria
  and Morocco, but sharing with them the receipt of a common colonial
  policy of cultural assimilation. This delightful book on
  ‘<em>Ajeeb</em> Goa’s <em>Gajab</em> Politics’ provokes such
  questions.</p>
  <p>There are many many such aspects that can be teased out of the
  study. I do not want to suggest here that it is a well-researched
  academic study, conforming to all the protocols of social science
  research. It is not. There are too many long quotations, too many
  tables of data, selective references to scholars, and a wide sweep of
  history, folklore, politics, demography, and sociology. Social
  scientists would be hesitant to make such excursions. But Sandesh
  Prabhudesai must not be asked to conform to the rules of social
  science research. They belong to a different profession from that to
  which he belongs. He is a journalist. He is a gentleman scholar. He
  has been a student leader of yesteryears. He is an activist involved
  in campaigns that have extended from fighting discrimination in a
  crematorium in Verla-Canca to joining the movement to make Konkani the
  state language. These are many personas. They give him an advantageous
  location from which to view Goa and to comment on its multiple
  transformations. These comments are insightful. They are valid. That
  is what makes the volume so valuable. I see him as a chronicler, and
  the book as a chronicle. He offers us, through the book, some valuable
  propositions. Many audiences can gain from it. I have not overlooked
  the wide generalisations he has made but have chosen instead to argue
  with them, question their data sources, challenge their formulations,
  explore their connections with larger debates outside Goa. His book
  connects with these large debates. I find the discussion on democratic
  politics, for example, very provoking.</p>
  <p>Prabhudesai has titled his book ‘<em>Ajeeb</em> Goa’s
  <em>Gajab</em> Politics’ . He repeats the phrase often in other
  chapters as if the narrative he has developed in each chapter
  confirms, once again, the validity of the title. Perhaps it does.
  Perhaps it does not. <em>Yeh Goa ke Log indeed Ajeeb hai</em>. QED
  Sandesh Prabhudesai. But so is the book. A society remains alive
  because while many remain silent on the distortions in society, and
  the causes that produce these social pathologies, there are some like
  Sandesh, who name the culprits, call out the politicians, expose the
  lies, denounce the liars. This book is the beginning of another
  interesting conversation on Goa. He deserves a complementary
  proposition. I offer him one: ‘The geography of Goa undermines its
  history’. Saudade.</p>
  <p><strong>Peter Ronald deSouza</strong><br />
  D D Kosambi Visiting Professor, Goa University<br />
  Former Director, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla.</p>
  <p>Dona Paula 20 December 2021</p>
</body>
</html>
