<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: Old is Gold</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-7">Chapter 7</h3>
  <h1 id="old-is-gold">'Old' is Gold</h1>
  <p>The tiny state of Goa on the western coast of India is divided into three geographical divisions: the coastland, the midland, and the hinterland. All three are equally beautiful, pristine, peaceful, and soothing with their unique characteristics. The coastland primarily consists of beaches and low-lying river basins strewn with coconut plantations. The midland is made up of plateaus and small hillocks planted with cashew, rivulets flowing in the valleys, some islands, refreshing green paddy fields and other vegetation including Kullagar (orchards of coconut, betel nut and all kinds of fruit-bearing trees). The hinterland comprises mountainous regions of the Sahyadri Ghats with thick forests, consisting of rich flora and fauna, boasting a rich biodiversity, and replete with waterfalls.</p>
  <p>The coastland, which was earlier predominantly dependent on fishing, toddy tapping and some agriculture, is now the economic hotspot of Goa due to tourism. The hinterland, where cashew plantation, shifting cultivation and terrace farming were the primary economic activities, has been hijacked by the mining industry operating open-pit mines for manganese and iron ore, and laterite and other stone quarries, effectively bulldozing its agricultural economy. Though industrial estates have come up on the plateaus, the midland, however, is still dominated by agriculture and horticulture. The politics of economics, accordingly, differs in all these three ‘lands’.</p>
  <p>With agriculture coming to a grinding halt in the hinterland, tourism booming in the coastland, and manufacturing as well as the services sector growing slowly in the midland, urbanisation has increased in leaps and bounds in the last four to five decades. More in number than municipal towns are the census towns, which are spread in the villages, especially of the coastal belt. In fact, the entire coastal stretch from Pernem to Canacona is now urbanised. The locals tend to blame migrants from outside Goa for this trend, but in reality there are more locals who have migrated to the towns than the Bhaile (outsiders).</p>
  <p>In 1960, Goa was 85 per cent rural and only 15 per cent urban. Today, it is 62 per cent urban and only 38 per cent rural. This is the opposite of the rest of India: 35 per cent urban and 65 per cent rural. In the last 50 years (till the 2011 Census), the urban population has increased by 8.19 lakhs. The migrants from other states among these would not exceed 3.5 lakhs, or at the most four lakhs. This means that the same number of Goans (or more) have either shifted their base from the village to a city managed by a municipality, or that the village itself has turned into a small township administered by a village panchayat. In addition, there are new townships like Porvorim that come under several panchayats. This has not only impacted the socioeconomic structure of Goa, but also the politics of land.</p>
  <h2 id="old-conquests-rule-goa">Old Conquests Rule Goa</h2>
  <p>Old and New Conquests are not merely historical terms, or geographical territories. They are more significant today politically. The Old Conquests form one-fifth of Goa’s geographical spread, consisting of only four talukas − Bardez, Tiswadi, Mormugao, and Salcete. But they include the port town of Vasco, the commercial towns of Mapusa and Margao, and the capital city of Panaji. In addition, Goa’s prime tourist belt is spread out in the Old Conquests. In contrast, in the New Conquests it is only Pernem and Canacona talukas that have some beaches, and do not have tourism spread into the interior villages. The Old Conquests are thus thickly populated, and their population is swelling by the day.</p>
  <p>Goa has a total of 40 Assembly constituencies. Out of these, the Old Conquests comprise 24 constituencies, more than half of this total − four in Mormugao, five in Tiswadi, seven in Bardez and eight in Salcete. Even during the time when Goa was a Union Territory, when six Assemblies were constituted from 1963 to 1984 out of 28 constituencies, the Old Conquests had 16 constituencies, again more than half. And historically, we know that the Old Conquests were dominated by Christians, since no significant religious conversions took place in the New Conquests.</p>
  <p>Constituencies In Old Conquests: Union Territory &amp; State</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TALUKAS</th>
  <th>UT</th>
  <th>CONSTITUENCIES</th>
  <th>STATE</th>
  <th>CONSTITUENCIES</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Siolim, Calangute, Mapusa,Tivim, Aldona</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Siolim, Calangute, Mapusa, Tivim, Aldona, Saligao, Porvorim</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tiswadi</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Panaji, St Cruz, Cumbarjuve, St Andre</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Panaji, St Cruz, Cumbarjuve, St Andre, Taleigao</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Cortalim, Dabolim</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Cortalim, Dabolim, Mormugao, Vasco</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Cuncolim, Benaulim, Navelim, Margao, Curtorim</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>Cuncolim, Benaulim, Navelim, Margao, Curtorim, Velim, Fatorda, Nuvem</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>16</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Election Commission of India</p>
  <p>Until the 2007 Assembly election, the Old Conquests had 22 constituencies. However, after delimitation, from the 2009 Lok Sabha elections, Porvorim was added to Bardez taluka and Dabolim was added to Mormugao taluka. On the other hand, in the New Conquests, Dhargalim in Pernem taluka and Poinguinim in Canacona taluka were dropped as Assembly segments. Also, old components of the other Assembly segments were exchanged, with additions and deletions. The whole exercise was conducted in response to the increasing or decreasing number of voters, as a result of in-migration from other states and local migration of Goans to urban areas.</p>
  <p>It is therefore important to understand these trends of urbanisation that are leading to the Old Conquests becoming politically and economically dominant day by day. It is equally important to analyse the influence of the minority Christian community, which is concentrated in the Old Conquests. Are they losing their political hegemony in Goa’s politics? Is that the reason for the inhabitants of the Old Conquests to be up in arms against the housing projects coming up in their areas? Has Goa’s politics started moving around land with a demographic perspective?</p>
  <p>Goans - Not Migrants - Congesting The Cities!</p>
  <p>In 1977, the veteran freedom fighter Madhav Bir was elected as the Panaji MLA to the fifth assembly. During an assembly debate on Housing, he demanded that the newly formed Goa Housing Board (1969) should start developing the plateau of Alto-Betim, through which passed a road going to Mapusa from Panaji via the Mandovi bridge which was built in 1971. It was then an open space except for a few prominent bungalows, like the one owned by the then chief minister, Shashikala Kakodkar.</p>
  <p>With Panaji seeing rapid development as the capital of Goa, pressure for housing had started mounting. Taking up the suggestion made by Bir, a new Housing Board colony came up there, followed by other colonies, such as the Journalists’ Colony, Defence Colony, etc. The ‘development’ of the plateau got a boost, and within four decades Porvorim became the largest township of Goa with a population of over 60,000 in a small area of 8.12 square kilometres.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Since 2009, it has been a separate assembly constituency with over 25,000 voters.</p>
  <p>The Mandovi bridge collapsed in 1986, and within two years a second bridge was built. Later, the old bridge was repaired and returned into operation as a parallel bridge. In 2019, to regulate the heavy volume of traffic from Porvorim, as well as the other townships of Bardez taluka, a third bridge, the Atal Setu, has been built above the existing two bridges.</p>
  <p>Porvorim once used to be a plateau that served as a grazing pasture for cattle. It was, in fact, a small vaddo of the Socorro village, down the plateau, at the crossroads where the Panaji- Mapusa national highway cuts through the road from Socorro to Sangolda. People living on the Porvorim plateau don’t even know that the name belonged to a small marketplace (tintto) on the crossroads down the hill. The politics of this township and the constituency revolves around land, and only the land. This plateau is shared between the six village panchayats of Socorro, Salvador de Mundo, Penha da Franca, Reis Magos, Pilerne and Sangolda. And more importantly, the land is owned by four Communidades of Serula, Pilerne, Sangolda, and Nerul. It is exclusively used for housing.</p>
  <p>During his first tenure as the chief minister, Manohar Parrikar had proposed to incorporate this whole township, as well as the extended city of Panaji in Taleigao panchayat into the Panaji municipality, for which he had constituted Goa’s first municipal corporation, the City Corporation of Panaji (CCP). But Parrikar had to surrender to the mighty power of landpoliticians who dominated the local panchayats and the plan was shelved. Today, the CCP is a corporation only in name, while Porvorim continues to be administered by the six panchayats and the three Communidades. Hardly any person living on this plateau belongs to these villages. They are either Goans who have migrated from other villages, from Pernem to Canacona, or wealthy migrants from other states. The government has also shifted the Secretariat, the Assembly, and even the High Court to Porvorim, along with some other establishments.</p>
  <p>Porvorim is not the only township of Goa. Panaji itself has expanded to Taleigao, Bambolim, Merces, Chimbel, Kadamba Plateau of Bainguinim, right up to Old Goa. Other towns in the Old Conquests are no exception. The port town of Vasco has expanded to cover almost all the hillocks around it, such as Sada, New Vaddem, Driver Hill, Uttor Dongor, Chichalim, Dabolim, as well as the plateau of Zuarinagar; Margao now includes Vidyanagar (Housing Board colony), Fatorda, Navelim, and Davorlim; and Mapusa covers Khorlim, Ganeshpuri, Duler, etc, making them thickly populated extended towns of Goa.</p>
  <p>The biggest new settlement in the New Conquests is found in Ponda city that has expanded to Shantinagar, Curti, Bethora, up to Borim and Usgao. Besides this, a central vaddo like Marcela of Tivrem-Vargao panchayat, Housing Board Colonies of Sankhli, as well as Bicholim, and several other places have developed into small or large townships settled by urbanised middle and upper-class Goans. Compared to other states, Goa has very few slum areas: Baina and Zuarinagar of Vasco; Moti Dongor of Margao; Indiranagar of Chimbel; Ganganagar and Ekta Nagar of Mapusa, etc.</p>
  <p>The Census of India defines a town as:</p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li>All places with a municipality, corporation, cantonment board or notified town area committee etc.</li>
  <li>All other places which satisfy the following criteria:
  <ul>
  <li>a minimum population of 5000;</li>
  <li>at least 75 per cent of the male working population engaged in non-agricultural pursuits; and</li>
  <li>a density of population of at least 400 per sq. km.<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></li>
  </ul></li>
  </ol>
  <p>Based on these criteria, Goa had only five towns in 1950, to which six were added after liberation in 1961. In spite of urbanisation and an influx of migrants into city areas, by 1981, the number of towns had increased from 11 to 15, including the municipal towns. But the number doubled to 31 by 1991. By 2001 Goa had 44 towns and the figure reached 70 in 2011. This includes 14 municipalities and 56 other townships. Now, the urban agglomerations are not limited to suburbs of municipal towns, but cover practically the entire coastal belt, from Pernem in the north to Canacona in the south. The majority of these fall in the Old Conquests. For all practical purposes, the Goa of today is a City State!</p>
  <p>Following a state-wide agitation against the conspiracy of Goa’s politicians to concretise large parts of the state, the destructive Regional Plan of Goa was finally scrapped in 2006. But the struggle continues even today. The focus has shifted to mega housing projects that are coming up in the coastal villages of the Old Conquests without first building the required infrastructure to support them. A prime example is the mega housing project of the Rahejas proposed in the sleepy village of Carmona in Salcete. The Rahejas had planned for constructing 750 dwellings in an area of 80,000 square metres, adding not less than two to three thousand people to the village population of just four thousand, living in about a thousand houses. The project, meant for people from outside Goa, was finally scrapped in spite of the support of local politicians. The urbanisation of Goa however continues unabated.</p>
  <p>The villages of Goa are shrinking as it slowly turns into a City State. The graph clearly shows that the rate of population growth in rural parts of Goa is not only declining but has reached a negative mode for the last three decades. From minus two per cent in 2001, it has declined dramatically to minus eighteen per cent in just ten years. That’s alarming. The figures of 2021 are yet to be released.</p>
  <p>What it means in terms of number is that though Goa had a population of five lakhs living in its villages in 1960, in 2011, despite population growth it has reached only 5.51 lakhs. That’s a negligible increase of 10 per cent over 50 years. This is because either most villagers have migrated to the cities, or their villages have been converted into urban agglomerations. In contrast, the towns of Goa had a marginal population of 87,000 at the time of liberation. Today, it has zoomed to nine lakhs. A growth of 934 per cent in five decades!</p>
  <h2 id="the-christian-factor-in-the-old-conquests">The Christian Factor In The Old Conquests</h2>
  <p>Since people from the New Conquests are migrating to the Old Conquests, it stands to reason that the numbers will be dominated by Hindus. This does not mean that Christians from the New Conquests are not migrating. For employment opportunities and better educational prospects, many Christians from the New Conquests prefer buying a flat in a city, rather than buying land in the village and building a house. Overall, the Hindu population is rising constantly in the Old Conquests and declining in the New Conquests.</p>
  <p>However, this does not imply that Christians are a minority as far as Goa’s electoral politics is concerned. Rather, in some of the constituencies of the Old Conquests, it’s a brutal majority. Unlike in the ‘60s and ‘70s, many village-based constituencies of the Old Conquests have been swelling with urbanised Goans and migrants from outside Goa. Most of them are non- Christians. But this does not affect the Christian domination in their constituencies. The table is a testimony.</p>
  <p>Rural Goa: 1961-2011 (%)</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th></th>
  <th>HINDU</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>CHRISTIAN</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>MUSLIM</th>
  <th></th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2001</td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2001</td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2001</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>57</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>43</td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tiswadi</td>
  <td>55</td>
  <td>68</td>
  <td>45</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>41</td>
  <td>38</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>19</td>
  <td>80</td>
  <td>75</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>OLD-CONQUESTS</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>47</td>
  <td>59</td>
  <td>47</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pernem</td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>92</td>
  <td>13</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>96</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Satari</td>
  <td>97</td>
  <td>96</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td>90</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>9</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>62</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>26</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>81</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>NEW-CONQUESTS</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>10</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Census of India</p>
  <p>When Goa went for its first poll in 1963, the Christians constituted nearly 60 per cent of the electorate in the then 16 constituencies of the Old Conquests. Since then, the number of constituencies has risen to 24, new townships have come up, people from outside Goa and from the New Conquests have migrated in, but still nearly half of the population remains Christian. The Hindu population, in the last 50 years, has increased marginally, from 40 to 47 per cent. And the rise in the Muslim population is still at a single digit, from one to five per cent.</p>
  <p>In terms of talukas, Bardez always had Hindu-majority constituencies, such as Mapusa, Siolim and Tivim. They always remained bastions of the Maharashtra Gomantak Party (MGP). In 1977, the MGP had won even the Calangute seat. Their Christian MLA, Raul Fernandes, was the education minister in Shashikala Kakodkar’s government.</p>
  <p>The Christian population of Tiswadi has also reduced drastically in the last five decades, from 45 to 28 per cent. Even one-time Christian-majority constituencies, such as St Cruz and St Andre are dominated by the Hindus today. But, except for Shripad Kunkalienkar, who won the seat twice in 1977 and 1984 on a Congress ticket, and Vishnu Wagh who took the seat in 2012 on a BJP ticket, St Andre has always elected a Christian candidate. Dr Jack de Sequeira, known in Goan politics as the leader of the Christian community, was elected from St Cruz three times, from 1967 to 1977 on UGP and Janata Party tickets. Till today, St Cruz has not elected a Hindu MLA.</p>
  <p>Cortalim is the only constituency in Mormugao which was dominated by Christians right from the beginning, having always had Christian MLAs. In spite of the influx of migrant outsiders and local Goans, other constituencies in and around the port town of Vasco were also held by Christian candidates several times. Momugao was in fact a Hindu-majority constituency right from the beginning and yet held by Christian legislators. Prominent among them are Urminda Lima Leitao (UGP) in 1963, John Manuel Vaz (Ind) in 1994, and his son Karl Vaz (Congress) in 2002.</p>
  <p>Even after continuous migrations, and new townships coming up every five years, Salcete is still held by the Christian community. It has eight constituencies. The whole picture of election results in Goa changes when counting begins in Salcete. During the Union Territory days when it had five constituencies, only Margao was consistently held by a Hindu, like Vasudev Sarmalkar and Anant alias Babu Naik till he was defeated by Adv Uday Behmbre in a historic election held in 1984. All three of them were in total harmony with the Christians. The rest of the four constituencies till 1984 and seven seats till date have always been held by Christian MLAs.</p>
  <p>The only exception is Fatorda, which came into existence as an assembly seat in 1989. Luis Alex alias Mama Cardoz, a tribal leader, won the seat thrice, from 1989 to 1999, and lost it to BJP’s Damu Naik in 2002 by a slim margin of just 588 votes, that too because Monte Cruz (UGDP) split his Congress votes by polling around 4000 votes. But Damu Naik could not hold on beyond two elections. Vijai Sardesai, either as an Independent or as a candidate of the Goa Forward Party, has been defeating the BJP candidate in Fatorda, with full support of the Christian community. He is now in trouble for the 2022 poll because the Christians are condemning him for joining hands with the BJP government.</p>
  <p>The Election Commission of India neither maintains its records on the basis of religion, nor promotes elections on religious lines. A similar spirit is shown by Goan voters, though political parties do count the number of voters based on religion. One such break-up, though not fully authentic, was created by Vivek Mordekar, one of Goa’s leading IT professionals, on the basis of surnames. This provides a clear picture of how religion counts in Goan politics in terms of choosing popular candidates, but does not matter when it comes to voting.</p>
  <p>Religions 2017: Old Conquests</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>NO</th>
  <th>CONSTITUENCY</th>
  <th>HINDU</th>
  <th>CHRISTIAN</th>
  <th>MUSLIM</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1</td>
  <td>Nuvem</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Benaulim</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>86</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>3</td>
  <td>Velim</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>78</td>
  <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Curtorim</td>
  <td>27</td>
  <td>64</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Cuncolim</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>6</td>
  <td>Calangute</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>49</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>7</td>
  <td>St. Andre</td>
  <td>52</td>
  <td>46</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>8</td>
  <td>Cortalim</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>44</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>9</td>
  <td>Fatorda</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>10</td>
  <td>Navelim</td>
  <td>39</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>21</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>11</td>
  <td>Aldona</td>
  <td>59</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>12</td>
  <td>St.Cruz</td>
  <td>55</td>
  <td>31</td>
  <td>14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>13</td>
  <td>Cumbarjua</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>14</td>
  <td>Siolim</td>
  <td>69</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>15</td>
  <td>Saligao</td>
  <td>66</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>16</td>
  <td>Panaji</td>
  <td>64</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>17</td>
  <td>Taleigao</td>
  <td>63</td>
  <td>27</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>18</td>
  <td>Margao</td>
  <td>56</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>21</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>19</td>
  <td>Porvorim</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>20</td>
  <td>Dabolim</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>21</td>
  <td>Tivim</td>
  <td>77</td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>22</td>
  <td>Mapusa</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>23</td>
  <td>Vasco-Da-Gama</td>
  <td>66</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>24</td>
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>73</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>16</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>AVERAGE</td>
  <td>53</td>
  <td>39</td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Vivek Mordekar, IT Professional, Margao</p>
  <p>Even after an in-migration in large numbers and the influx of local Hindus (also a few Muslims), five constituencies in Salcete continue to be dominated by Christians: Nuvem, Benaulim, Velim, Curtorim and Cuncolim.</p>
  <p>The second category shown in the table is of five constituencies where the population of Hindu and Christian- Muslim minorities is almost equal: Calangute, St Andre, Cortalim, Fatorda, and Navelim. These were the Christianmajority seats in the first two decades, but the demography has changed continually since the 1980s. Cortalim consists of a large number of migrant labourers settled in Zuarinagar, while Navelim consists of in-migrant Hindus and Christians and equally large numbers of local Hindus who have migrated from the New Conquests. In spite of this, religion never became a deciding factor in electing the MLA. Neither the MGP nor the BJP could find roots here, and neither could a candidate belonging to the Hindu community ever succeed.</p>
  <p>The third category consists of 14 seats out of a total of 24, more than half. It also consists of major commercial or port towns in the Old Conquests, such as Mapusa, Panaji, Margao, Vasco, and Mormugao, which have always remained dominated by Hindus. But even these towns have been electing Christian candidates so far, such as Francisco D’Souza and his son Joshua in Mapusa from 1999 to 2017, once on the Goa Rajiv Congress ticket and then under the BJP banner.</p>
  <p>With the port town getting congested, Dabolim constituency was carved out of Mormugao constituency, which included more than half of the port town and Zuarinagar too. It was then renamed as Vasco after Goa became a State. From the 2009 Lok Sabha election and 2012 of the Assembly, Vasco was separated from Dabolim, limiting it to the main town. This segment with Hindu majority but sizeable Christians, has elected Christian MLAs like Adv Herculano Dourado (1980) and Simon D’Souza (1984 &amp;1989) of the Congress, Dr Wilfred Mesquita (1994) of the MGP, Jose Philip D’Souza (1999/2007) of UGDP and NCP, and Carlos Almeida (2012/2017) of the BJP. Even today, it has a Christian population of hardly 15 per cent. (We have already discussed Mormugao earlier).</p>
  <p>But at the same time, the Christian domination is so strong that the Congress Chief Minister, Digambar Kamat, during his single five-year tenure from 2007-12, had to accommodate seven Christian MLAs in his 12-member cabinet. Most of them were from Salcete taluka. Even today, the Pramod Sawantled BJP government has five Christian ministers and a Deputy Speaker.</p>
  <p>In spite of being such a dominant force, Goa could never get a Christian chief minister through a public mandate, other than Luizinho Faleiro, the sole exception. In 1999, the Congress achieved the magic figure of 21 which led to Faleiro becoming the chief minister. Otherwise, all other Christian chief ministers have seized power by toppling the ‘popular’ governments through defections and horse trading. They include Churchill Alemao (1990), Dr Luis Proto Barbosa (1990), Dr Wilfred de Souza (1993 &amp; 1998) and Francisco Sardinha (1999).</p>
  <p>Realising the non-religious attitude of the Goan voter, the BJP master-strategist, Manohar Parrikar, had to change his electoral tactics by going soft, even on Soft Hindutva, and follow the Congress line of ‘appeasement of the minorities’. Parrikar never succeeded in ‘Mission Salcete’ but could reach the magic figure of 21 in 2012 by winning 12 seats in the Old Conquests, by fielding Christian candidates in those constituencies.</p>
  <p>It is perhaps for the first time in the history of Goan politics that the AAP leader, Arvind Kejriwal, has made an open statement that his deputy chief minister would be a Christian. The same AAP, had side-lined Elvis Gomes after promoting him as the CM face, claiming that his Christian face was becoming a liability. And now the ‘over smart’ party is also receiving flak from the common Goan for encouraging Bhandari and Christian politics. Not only the Delhi-based AAP, but none of the so-called ‘outsider’ parties have been able to comprehend the dynamics and spirit of Bahujan politics of Goa.</p>
  <p>Unlike the rest of India, Goa has a different history due to the brutal policy of religious conversions that the Portuguese adopted. Goans were undoubtedly victims of the conversions as well as the Inquisition against the neo-converts. But this coin has another side. Due to the conversion policy, which the Portuguese did not implement while winning over the New Conquests, we have a mix of two major religions in Goa, divided into two Conquests. Due to this, religion-based political parties cannot play their fanatic politics in Goa. In that sense (not otherwise) the religious conversions have been a blessing in disguise for this tiny state on the western coast of India!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Wikipedia; Porvorim<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>Census of India<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
