<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: The Politics of Land</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-13">Chapter 13</h3>
  <h1 id="the-politics-of-land">The Politics of Land</h1>
  <p>Whether it was the revolutionary Assembly election of 1963 or the
  historic Opinion Poll of 1967, it was a battle for land. The land you
  cultivate, the land on which you have built a house, or the whole land
  of Goa you belong to. Precisely this is the reason the majority of
  Goans voted for the MGP but rejected its mergerist agenda. And
  precisely due to the same reason the pro-farmer ‘reformist’ Bhau
  Bandodkar was elected back to power in 1967 with 16 seats and once
  again in 1972 with 18 seats. After his sudden demise in 1973, his
  daughter Shashikala Kakodkar carried forward his legacy
  successfully.</p>
  <p>In 1975, the MGP government brought about yet another ‘socialist’
  legislation, the Goa, Daman and Diu Mundkars (Protection from
  eviction) Act, 1975.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Right in the beginning the Act
  states: It is meant to provide for better protection to mundkars
  against eviction from their dwelling houses and for granting them the
  right to purchase the same and to make certain other provisions
  connected therewith, where such houses have been built at a reasonable
  price; it is expedient to abolish the system of free services rendered
  by mundkars and turn it into a remunerated one.</p>
  <p>Following this, based on an extensive land survey conducted by the
  government, the MGP government in 1976 amended the Agricultural
  Tenancy Act 1964, with a fifth amendment. At last, the tenant who was
  paying one-sixth of their agricultural produce for 12 years, was made
  the deemed owner of the cultivable land, provided he purchased it
  through legal procedures. He was free from the clutches of
  Bhatkarshai. Was he? Was the dream fulfilled?</p>
  <h2 id="dragging-cases--snailing-courts">Dragging Cases &amp; Snailing
  Courts</h2>
  <p>As per the procedure laid down in the Act, the Mamlatdar or the
  Deputy Collector is authorised to complete the formalities including
  hearing the case and issue a Sanad of ownership to the tenant. The
  Assembly sessions are full of questions asked by the MLAs about the
  pending cases of tenancy. The latest one was asked by Ponda MLA Ravi
  Naik in 2021 regarding pending cases since 2012. Revenue Minister
  Jennifer Monserrate replied that 2846 cases are still pending and only
  527 sanads have been issued in 10 years.<a href="#fn2"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
  Similarly, 819 cases of Mundkars are still pending. In the last 10
  years, 2296 mundkars have officially purchased their house from the
  Bhatkars while 1147 have still not been able to purchase the houses,
  in spite of declaring them as deemed owners.<a href="#fn3"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
  <p>The legislations were enacted in 1975-76, but the actual
  implementation started in the last decade of the 20th century, after
  1990, almost 15 years later. Even after three decades the tillers have
  not become the deemed owners of the cultivable land or their houses.
  Isn’t it a tragedy of Indian democracy? The MGP was supported mainly
  by the people from the New Conquests. But still suffering are a large
  number of people from the Old Conquests. The pending cases in each
  taluka of the Old Conquests are between 500 to 750. A few hundreds
  have become owners of their rightful land in the last 10 years.</p>
  <p>Similar is the plight of the mundkars. More cases are pending in
  the Old Conquests than the New Conquests. In eight talukas of the New
  Conquests, only 318 people have not been able to purchase their houses
  in spite of their cases being disposed of. But in the Old Conquests,
  over 700 families in four talukas have not been able to purchase their
  houses. Is this the reason they are still migrating even at the cost
  of giving up their citizenship, as they could raise money to either
  buy their mundkarial houses or build a decent house in the place of a
  hut-like structure? No political party or the elected legislator has
  bothered to inquire about their plight.</p>
  <p>STATE OF TENANCY &amp; MUNDKAR CASES FROM 2012-2021</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TALUKA</th>
  <th>COURTS</th>
  <th>TENANCY</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>MUNDKAR</th>
  <th></th>
  <th></th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>PENDING</td>
  <td>DECLARED</td>
  <td>PENDING</td>
  <td>PURCHASED</td>
  <td>NOT PURCHASED</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>OLD CONQUESTS</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>753</td>
  <td>114</td>
  <td>225</td>
  <td>606</td>
  <td>327</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tiswadi</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>520</td>
  <td>183</td>
  <td>192</td>
  <td>618</td>
  <td>120</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>503</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>112</td>
  <td>187</td>
  <td>241</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>33</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>24</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>26</td>
  <td>1836</td>
  <td>361</td>
  <td>562</td>
  <td>1494</td>
  <td>712</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>NEW CONQUESTS</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Pernem</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>489</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>356</td>
  <td>71</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>229</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>245</td>
  <td>75</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sattari</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>43</td>
  <td>26</td>
  <td>192</td>
  <td>49</td>
  <td>117</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>24</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>13</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>17</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Dharbandora</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>16</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>21</td>
  <td>1010</td>
  <td>168</td>
  <td>257</td>
  <td>804</td>
  <td>318</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>GRAND TOTAL</td>
  <td>47</td>
  <td>2846</td>
  <td>529</td>
  <td>819</td>
  <td>2298</td>
  <td>1030</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Assembly Questions</p>
  <h2 id="delay-tactics-of-bhatkars">Delay Tactics Of Bhatkars</h2>
  <p>Nearly six decades have passed but the tiller has still not become
  the owner and the mundkar has not become the owner of his or her
  ancestral house. While debating the Tenancy bill in 1964, Vijay
  Kamulkar, the MGP MLA who defeated two mighty landlords Raoraje
  Deshprabhu and Sadashiv Desai, had predicted this. He had urged the
  government to set up a council to monitor the implementation of the
  act. Otherwise the landlords would keep approaching the civil courts
  to stall its implementation, he had cautioned.</p>
  <p>Everything was going smooth as long as the tenant was paying a
  fixed Khand of one sixth of the produce to the bhatkar. But the
  landlords bounced back the minute the fifth amendment to the
  Agricultural Tenancy Act was passed in the Assembly in 1976. Five
  petitions were filed before the Judicial Commissioner by the Bhatkars,
  challenging its constitutional validity. The government had deleted
  Chapter III from the Act, which was permitting landlords to resume the
  land for personal cultivation, with a ceiling. Instead, Chapter IIA
  was inserted. Its section 18A permitted transfer of land to the
  cultivating tenant for a price to be paid to the landlord. Landlords
  feared that a tenant cultivating lands under different landlords may
  have far larger areas of land than his landlord. On 4 April 1979, the
  Judicial Commissioner struck down the amended act, terming it
  unconstitutional and not constituting agrarian reform.</p>
  <p>The Shashikala government swiftly moved to the Supreme Court,
  challenging the judgement of the Judicial Commissioner. Her government
  was pushed into trouble by two young rebels − Dayanand Narvekar and
  Dilkhush Desai. Despite that she managed to survive a no-trust motion
  with the help of two independents from Daman and Diu. But then her own
  minister Shankar Laad quit the ministry, pushing her government once
  again into a minority. Laad was offered the Chief Minister’s seat by
  the Leader of the Opposition and architect of the rebellion Anant
  Narasimh alias Babu Naik, the Congressman belonging to the landlord
  community. Shashikala-tai succeeded in getting President’s Rule
  imposed by convincing the then Janata Party Prime Minister Morarji
  Desai. The opposition did not succeed in forming an alternate
  government, but the MGP government was out.</p>
  <p>Simultaneously, Tai also managed to convince the Centre to move
  before the Parliament an amendment to include the Agricultural Tenancy
  Act in the ninth schedule of the Constitution. As per the provision,
  acts included in the ninth schedule cannot be challenged in the courts
  of law. Meanwhile, the Janata government collapsed, fresh elections
  were held and Indira Gandhi’s Congress government came back to power.
  On 31 July 1983, the Centre moved the 47th amendment to the
  Constitution in the Parliament. It included tenancy acts related to
  land reforms enacted by the states of Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Tamil
  Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal as well as the union territory of
  Goa, Daman and Diu. The amendment bill included both the acts of Goa,
  the original Tenancy Act of 1964 as well as the fifth amendment of
  1976. The Statement of Objects and Reasons stated:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“The various Acts which have been suggested for inclusion have been
  examined and it is proposed to include in the Ninth Schedule such of
  these Acts as have either been challenged or are likely to be
  challenged and thereby ensure that the implementation of these Acts is
  not adversely affected by litigation.”<a href="#fn4"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The constitutional amendment was passed by the Parliament and it
  was assented to by the President of India on 26 August 1984. The Goan
  landlords challenged the inclusion of the fifth amendment in the ninth
  schedule in the Supreme Court, which was also hearing Goa government’s
  appeal against the high court order striking down the ninth amendment.
  The landlords were defended by a phalanx of India’s eminent lawyers
  including Fali Nariman, M N Phadke, S K Mehta and even Goa’s topmost
  lawyer Manohar Usgaonkar.</p>
  <p>Meanwhile, in the 1980 Assembly election, Congress rode to power
  with an absolute majority and Pratapsingh Raoji Rane Sardesai, the
  Khashe from Sattari, became the chief minister of Goa. He ruled the
  state for 10 long years uninterrupted. The case in the Supreme Court
  was moving at a snail’s pace. Ravi Naik, the MGP MLA since 1984, also
  filed an intervention application on behalf of his Akhil Gomantak
  Kull-Mundkar Sanghatana to expedite the case, but all in vain. Rane
  became the CM for the third consecutive term after the 1989 election,
  but his government was toppled on 27 March 1990. The Progressive
  Democratic Front, a coalition government of the Congress rebels and
  Ramakant Khalap-led MGP, was formed. The MGP leaders pursued the case
  in the Supreme Court.</p>
  <p>Within four months, on 23 July 1990, the apex court delivered the
  judgement. It set aside the high court judgement and upheld the ninth
  amendment bill.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“The judgment of the Judicial Commissioner declaring the Act as
  ultra vires is accordingly set aside and the writ petitions filed by
  the respondents are dismissed. Consequently it is not necessary to
  deal with the writ petition (W.P. No. 864 of 1988) filed in this Court
  under Article 32 challenging the inclusion of the impugned Act in the
  9th Schedule of the Constitution and the same is rejected.”<a
  href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Meanwhile, the budget session of Goa Assembly was going on. Deputy
  CM Ramakant Khalap suddenly entered the House in a dramatic manner and
  made the announcement of the Supreme Court, calling it a historic day.
  Agriculture Minister Ravi Naik distributed sweets to the journalists
  in his cabin. Revenue Minister Dr Kashinath Jalmi moved into action,
  authorising the Joint Mamlatdars to issue sanads to the tenants after
  completing the formalities of purchasing the land. But lots of water
  had flown through the paddy fields in 30 years. The rural population
  had slipped from 85 per cent in 1960 to 59 per cent in 1990 due to
  large urbanisation.<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  <p>1990 was also the year that had started showing a negative growth
  in operational holdings in the agricultural sector. The area under
  cultivation had reduced from 92,000 hectares in 1970 to 66,000
  hectares in 1990, a decline of 15 per cent.<a href="#fn7"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <p>The 60 per cent workforce involved in agriculture in 1960 had
  declined to 16 per cent. The contribution of agriculture to the Gross
  State Domestic Product (GSDP) had dropped to just 10 per cent<a
  href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> In my own village of Loliem-Pollem
  in Canacona on the Goa-Karnataka border, agriculture and allied
  activities had stopped completely, the lands had fallen fallow,
  cowsheds had turned into garages and only our old parents were left in
  our homes. We all had migrated to the towns for our livelihoods. The
  Economic Survey 2002 I am quoting here had also pushed the chapter on
  ‘Agriculture &amp; Allied Services’ to the second last position,
  before ‘Other Sectors’:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“The declining interest towards agriculture may be attributable to
  small land holdings, high cost of wages and nonavailability of
  agriculture labourers. In addition to this, increasing urbanisation
  has exerted pressure on land making the agriculture activity
  economically less viable on relative terms. On the other hand Goa
  being a major tourist destination attracting over 1.3 million tourists
  every year, which is equivalent to the population of the state, there
  is a tremendous scope for high value added crops like horticulture,
  floriculture, medicinal plants, vegetables etc.”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>But rather than meeting this scope by diverting the agro economy of
  Goa to cash crops, the politicians preferred to meet the growing
  demand of land for housing for the outsiders and hotels including
  large five-star resorts for the tourists. Converting agricultural land
  into commercial became the prime ‘business’ of politicians. The
  Assembly elected in 1990 witnessed a spurt of defections, topplings,
  seven chief ministers in five years and the Town and Country Planning
  Department − which converts the land − becoming the most lucrative
  portfolio. The Planning and Development Authorities (PDAs), which
  prepare the Outline Development Plans (ODPs), became the battlegrounds
  for cronies of politicians to grab ‘commissions’. Ravi Naik, the
  one-time president of the Tenants and Mundkars Association, himself
  became one of the prime ‘broker-politicians’ of Goa.</p>
  <p>There were varied modus operandis followed to convert the
  agricultural land. The fifth amendment had widened the scope of
  tenanted land from paddy and arecanut to horticulture, cashew
  cultivation and coconut garden too. The tenant was considered the
  deemed purchaser and he had no right to transfer the land even by way
  of lease. Once the property was purchased under tenancy, the same
  could not be leased, mortgaged, or sold nor could it be converted to
  non-agricultural use without the permission of the Mamlatdar. It could
  be taken and given to another person, but only to cultivate, through
  the Mamlatdar. However, the landlord could sell his property if his
  land was not tenanted. Giving this background, Dr Nagesh Colvalkar,
  the Assistant Professor of V M Salgaocar College of Law, states:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“After 1975, landlords and builders filed several litigations based
  on Survey Records and Land Revenue Code claiming the ownership right.
  Litigations between tenants and landlords became more cumbersome due
  to non-preparation of Record of Rights, having no receipt of payment
  of rent to the Landlord with the Tenant and contract of lease. Under
  the Goa Agricultural Tenancy Act 1964 to claim tenancy right, the
  Tenant had to prove (a) possession of the land (b) Personal
  cultivation (c) Existence of lease (d) Payment of rent.”<a href="#fn9"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>There was also a spurt of complaints recorded at police stations,
  that tenants and mundkars were forcibly evicted from the land,
  allegedly at the behest of builders and with the blessings of
  politicians. Some of the ‘eviction experts’ also entered active
  politics. However, many builders followed a path of amicable
  settlements with the tenants or mundkars by providing them flats and
  shops in the buildings. And in many cases, yet another method was
  followed, called ‘negative declaration’ by the tenants. It means that
  the tenant swears in front of the Mamlatdar that his name has been
  wrongly entered as a tenant in the I &amp; XIV form of Land Records
  and withdraws from the land, in collusion with the builder and the
  landlord. In fact, this has now become a legal practice from the time
  the Supreme Court has upheld the order of Pernem Mamlatdar accepting
  negative declarations of the tenants. The Bombay High Court at Goa, in
  this case, had earlier struck down the Mamlatdar’s order of negative
  declaration, issued on 28 October 1986. This case was related to the
  controversial Golf Course project at Terekhol, where half of the
  tenants had withdrawn as tenants from the disputed property.
  Apparently, it was “amicably settled” while the villagers as well as
  the social activists were up in arms against the golf course
  project.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
  <p>From the time this judgement has been delivered by the Honourable
  Supreme Court, says young activist lawyer from Pernem Adv Prasad
  Shapurkar, hundreds and thousands of negative declarations have been
  given by the tenants with ‘free will’, in collusion with the landlord
  and the builder. But he is equally proud of the remaining half of the
  tenants of the Terekhol property, who did not bow down before the
  pressure from the golf course promoters, including the local
  politicians and the brokers. He is equally worried about the genuine
  tenants whose cases are simply dragging on in the courts of Mamlatdars
  for various reasons.</p>
  <h2 id="the-sunset-of-the-bjp">THE ‘SUNSET’ OF THE BJP</h2>
  <p>And why are the cases dragging on for so long despite having set up
  so many courts of Mamlatdars, Joint Mamlatdars and Deputy Collectors?
  Salcete has eight courts and still over 600 cases of tenants and
  mundkars are pending while little more than 200 have been settled in
  10 years. (See table on Pg 317). Margao MLA Digambar Kamat recently
  asked in the Assembly why the cases could not be expedited. And this
  is what the government officially told him:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“Courts of Mamlatdar &amp; Deputy Collector are also handling
  election matters, other duties such as Law &amp; Order, cases under
  various other Acts. There is less support staff in each court. The
  Government has initiated a Court Case Monitoring System which will
  help the government to monitor the progress of all the cases online.
  The process for recruiting additional staff is also in progress.
  Training has been given to the officers on the procedural aspects of
  hearing the matters. Idea of Saturday Courts have started taking up
  Tenancy and Mundkar cases.”<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Interestingly, the joint mamlatdars were initially assigned to
  exclusively handle the cases of tenants and mundkars. Each taluka
  today has more than one or two Joint Mamlatdars. But apparently it has
  not remained a priority for any government headed by any political
  party, since 1990. In fact, the reply given by the Government to the
  Assembly question raised by MLA Aleixo Reginald Lourenco in 2014
  reflects the apathy at the level of the Mamlatdar. One case of
  Constantino Pinto in Bardez has been dragging since 1972, and of
  Gurudas Talkar in Pernem since 1976 and Gurudas Ghatwal and others in
  Bicholim since 1983!<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  <p>The politicians holding the reins of governance are no less
  irresponsible. Digambar Kamat, who raised the issue of dragging
  tenancy cases in 2018, was the chief minister for five long years from
  2007. During his tenure, the Law Commission was headed by Adv Ramakant
  Khalap and assisted by Adv Mario Pinto Almeida and Adv Cleofato
  Coutinho. In 2009, the Commission framed a draft bill to set up
  exclusive revenue courts to deal with tenancy and mundkar cases,
  stating that the framers of the Constitution of India have adopted the
  principle of separation of Judiciary from Executive:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“The Commission is of the view that the judiciary work of
  Mamlatdars and Collectors must be separated from other routine work so
  that they can exclusively function as Courts and complete the judicial
  work before them expeditiously and without any interference. The
  Commission is of the opinion that a hierarchy of Revenue Courts can be
  created by establishing Taluka Revenue Courts with original
  jurisdiction and District Revenue Courts with appellate and revisional
  jurisdiction. We are also of the view that these courts should
  function under the overall supervision of the Administrative
  Tribunal.”<a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Despite being in power till 2012, the Kamat government did not pay
  heed to this most crucial legislation. Those were the days when
  illegal mining was at its peak. As though this apathy was not enough,
  the next Law Commission set up under the chief ministership of Manohar
  Parrikar and headed by Adv Narendra Sawaikar proposed in August 2013
  an alternative to the exclusive revenue courts, which finally
  boomeranged on the BJP government. By that time, the cases had piled
  up to over 3000, with Bardez topping the list with 846 cases.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“...we are conscious that the said Commission (headed by Khalap)
  proposed ‘The Goa Revenue Courts Bill 2009’ in their Report no. 3
  providing for a separate hierarchy of revenue officers solely to
  discharge judicial work under different laws. What this Commission
  proposes is to recommend amendment to the Goa Agricultural Tenancy Act
  and to give the core adjudicatory functions under the said Act which
  are presently given to the ‘Mamlatdars’ under the said Act to the
  courts of the Civil Judges appointed under the Goa Civil Courts Act
  designated as ‘Civil Judges’ and provide for a single Appellate
  authority which would be ‘Appellate Judge’ meaning the District Judges
  including all the Additional District Judges appointed under the Goa
  Civil Courts Act. Appellate Judges shall also exercise revisional
  jurisdiction over the proceedings before the Civil Judges. This
  Commission is of the considered opinion that utilisation of the Judges
  of the existing civil courts in the matter of tenancy declaration
  cases and determination of tenancy issues arising in civil suits and
  other proceedings should go a long way in expediting the
  decision-making in tenancy matters.”<a href="#fn14"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>By the time these amendment bills to the Tenancy and Mundkar Acts
  were passed on 21 August 2014, the pending tenancy cases had risen to
  5000 and 2800 Mundkar cases. Besides transferring the cases to the
  civil courts, it had also proposed a system of contract farming as
  well as a ‘sunset clause’, setting a deadline of three years to file
  applications by tenants and mundkars before the Mamlatdar for the
  ownership of the land. The bill had initially set up the limit of only
  one year. BJP legislator Dr Pramod Sawant moved only one amendment to
  change it to three years, and both the bills were passed ‘unanimously’
  by all the 40 legislators without much debate.<a href="#fn15"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
  <p>But there was an uproar all across Goa over the ‘sunset clause’ as
  well as transferring the cases to the civil courts. Revenue Minister
  Francisco D’Souza defended the legislation, claiming that “<em>civil
  courts are better places for the disposal of cases simply because
  judges are trained. On the other hand, mamlatdars are not so trained
  because most of them are promotees from ‘awal karkuns’ to mamlatdars.
  They do not have a legal background. They manage, but progress is very
  slow.</em>”</p>
  <p>There were allegations and counter-allegations, while demanding
  withdrawal of the bill. Reiterating his demand for special revenue
  courts to deal with the tenancy and mundkar cases, Congress leader
  Ramakant Khalap alleged: “<em>The legislation would develop a nexus
  between landowners and the real estate lobby to finish off the
  remaining agricultural land in Goa. Even though most of our
  agricultural land has already been bought by outsiders, now ‘upcoming
  moneybags’ will exploit the contract farming section of the amended
  act to eat up the remaining agricultural land in Goa.</em>”</p>
  <p>Laxmikant Parsekar, who by then had taken over as the CM with
  Parrikar becoming the defence minister of India, made a similar
  allegation, claiming that the opposition was politically motivated by
  the land sharks: “<em>The amendments to the Goa Tenancy Act seek to
  get rid of land grabbers who survive on the discord between the land
  owner and the tenant. The same landgrabbers and politically motivated
  leaders are now misleading the people, provoking them against the
  amendment…. If a tenant fails to file the claim within three years,
  the state government can grant more time in some cases.</em>”<a
  href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
  <p>Both sides were blaming each other, but were in agreement that the
  land sharks were looting Goa’s prime cultivable land! The BJP
  government remained adamant and transferred all the cases to the civil
  courts. Amidst the uproar came the 2017 Assembly election. In spite of
  introducing a series of social schemes for the cross-section of the
  society, building good infrastructure, and Parrikar holding one of the
  highest positions, of defence minister at the Centre, the BJP slipped
  down from 21 to 13 seats. The Congress, despite doing nothing but
  fighting among themselves and some of its ‘loyal soldiers’ hobnobbing
  with the Hindutva party, rose from nine to 17 and emerged as the
  largest single party in a hung Assembly. BJP supremo Amit Shah and
  influential union minister Nitin Gadkari moved into action and
  ‘managed’ to lift the anti-BJP regional outfits like the MGP and Goa
  Forward Party as well as the independents into the saffron camp to
  form its own government on 14 March 2017.</p>
  <p>Apparently, the BJP had learnt a lesson. After reviewing the
  election results and the unexpected shocking debacle of the BJP,
  revenue minister Francisco D’Souza announced that the government would
  withdraw the controversial amendments of the tenancy and mundkar acts,
  including the sunset clause, and cases would be reverted back to the
  mamlatdars. He admitted that the decision was being taken in view of
  the strong criticism from the opposition and the tenants’
  associations. He also assured to expedite the pending tenancy cases
  within three years. (Even after four years, over 3500 cases are still
  pending). Accordingly, the new amendments were moved in the third
  session of the Assembly in August 2017 to drop the controversial
  clauses. Revenue Minister Rohan Khaunte said roughly about 3900 cases
  (out of 4000 transferred to civil courts) would be transferred back to
  the mamlatdars. When the ruling party legislator Nilesh Cabral asked
  him if moving the cases to civil courts was detrimental to the
  tenants, Khaunte said: “<em>.. the rate of cases going in favour of
  the landlords and against the tenants remained almost the same, with
  it being 21 per cent when it was with the Mamlatdars and 23 per cent
  when it was with the civil courts.</em>”</p>
  <p>The most interesting statement came from BJP’s own Sports Minister
  Babu Azgaonkar, who is known for his bold and blunt talk. “The BJP
  government’s decision to move the cases from the mamlatdar courts to
  the senior civil judge had backfired on the BJP and it was the reason
  why the Congress managed to win so many seats in the election. If
  there is anyone who has been embarrassed by this amendment, it is the
  BJP.”<a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
  <h2 id="dealers-become-leaders">Dealers Become Leaders</h2>
  <p>Dr Nagesh Colvalkar, concludes his research paper on Land Reforms
  in Goa, by aptly focussing upon the unholy nexus between the land
  sharks, politicians, and bureaucrats:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“...in Goa today, the scenario is totally adverse against land
  reform laws. Cultivators purchase the land under tenancy law which
  must be exclusively used for agricultural purpose, but these tenants
  in reality sell the tenanted lands to the big builders and estate
  developers for carrying out construction activity in violation of the
  provisions of the Goa Agricultural Tenancy Act under the blessing of
  political leaders, land mafias and bureaucrats. This needs to be
  stopped at all cost, failing which land reforms in Goa will be a
  futile exercise without any gain to the state of Goa.”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Earlier in the ‘60s and the ‘70s, politics was a ‘Mission’, for
  which freedom fighters, social reformers, teachers etc. were entering
  the political arena. By the ‘80s, politics slowly began to turn into a
  ‘Profession’ and full-time politicians began to mushroom. This also
  led to a rise in corruption. But since the 1990s, it has now
  completely turned into a business of ‘Commission’. Earlier political
  parties were collecting funds from the lobbies of mine owners,
  contractors, private bus owners, trawler owners, industrialists,
  hoteliers etc. and the governments were serving the interest of their
  lobbies, at the cost of suppressing the welfare of the toiling masses.
  This also led to a series of public agitations by farmers, workers,
  toddy tappers, traditional fishermen like ramponkars, students, women,
  etc. But nowadays, representatives of the business lobbies have
  personally entered into active politics, posing as ‘social workers’ by
  donating generously for sports tournaments, cultural extravaganzas,
  and other public causes.</p>
  <p>These included a few landowners initially, but then came the
  private bus operators, trawler owners, contractors, hoteliers, and
  even mine owners. But now the Assembly is overflowing with the ‘social
  workers’ who are dealers of land, including builders, real estate
  developers, and even land brokers. The latest trend among these
  ‘broker-politicians’ is to get tickets for their brothers, wives and
  daughters so that they can increase their stake in power sharing.
  Perhaps this is the reason the cases of land grabbing, illegal land
  conversions, and encroachments of cultivable land are not topping the
  agendas of the Assembly debates. And the controversial amendments like
  16B to the Town and Country Planning Act are passed smoothly.</p>
  <p>We have six political leaders in the House, who are legally
  involved in construction business: Luizinho Faleiro, Ravi Naik,
  Digambar Kamat, Pandurang Madkaikar, Rohan Khaunte, and Tony
  Fernandes. The real estate developers like Babush Monserrate, Vijai
  Sardesai, and Nilesh Cabral have also entered the Assembly. People in
  political circles reveal that heavyweight politicians like Vishwajeet
  Rane, Dr Pramod Sawant, Isidore Fernandes etc. are known to be
  property brokers. In fact, before joining active politics, Dr Sawant
  was a land broker and is widely known till date in Sattari and
  Bicholim as ‘Property Sawant’. There was also a land dealing case in
  Canacona, which was widely reported since a sitting judge was expelled
  from the service. Junior Rane was allegedly involved in the land
  dealing. There is obviously nothing wrong with the land dealings since
  these are all legal businesses. But it is also a fact that
  illegalities in land conversions and land grabbing have become the
  order of the day with the entry of more and more land-dealing
  businessmen into the Goa Assembly. Today, in talukas like Pernem,
  where the tenants had once defeated mighty landlords of Goa, the
  prominent leaders contesting elections are the builders, real estate
  dealers, and brokers.</p>
  <p>The trend of Family Raj in politics coincides with the increasing
  trend of converting agricultural land into settlement and selling it
  to land sharks, which began in the last decade of the 20th century.
  With the advent of the 21st century began the era of Family Raj
  politics. Otherwise, it was only Bhausaheb Bandodkar who had brought
  his daughter Shashikala into active politics or Dr Jack Sequeira
  fielding his son Erasmo to become the South Goa MP, in the 1960s and
  ‘70s respectively. During the tenure of Digambar Kamat, Vishwajit Rane
  was the minister while his father Pratapsingh Rane was the
  Speaker.</p>
  <p>FAMILY RAJ POLITICS: SUCCESSES &amp; FAILURES</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>ELECTIONS</th>
  <th>NO</th>
  <th>CANDIDATES (PARTY, SEAT)</th>
  <th>CANDIDATES (RELATION, PARTY, SEAT)</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1967</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Dayanand Bandodkar</strong> (MGP, Madkai)</td>
  <td><strong>Shashikala Kakodkar</strong> (Daughter, MGP, Mandrem)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1972</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Dayanand Bandodkar</strong> (MGP, Mandrem)</td>
  <td><strong>Shashikala Kakodkar</strong> (Daughter, MGP,
  Bicholim)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>2002</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Churchill Alemao</strong> (Save Goa Congress,
  Navelim)</td>
  <td><strong>Joaquim Alemao</strong> (Brother, Save Goa Congress,
  Cuncolim)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2007</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Sudin Dhavalikar</strong> (MGP, Madkai)</td>
  <td><strong>Deepak Dhavalikar</strong> (Brother, MGP, Priol)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td><strong>Pratapsingh Rane</strong> (Congress, Poriem)</td>
  <td><strong>Vishwajit Rane</strong> (Son, Independent, Valpoi)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>Churchill Alemao (Congress, Benaulim)</td>
  <td><strong>Joaquim Alemao</strong> (Brother, Save Goa Congress,
  Cuncolim)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td><strong>Babush Monserrate</strong> (UGDP, Taleigaon)</td>
  <td>Jennifer Monserrate (Wife, UGDP, St. Cruz, Lost)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2012</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Pratapsingh Rane</strong> (Congress, Poriem)</td>
  <td><strong>Vishwajit Rane</strong> (Son, Congress, Valpoi)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td><strong>Sudin Dhavalikar</strong> (MGP, Madkai)</td>
  <td><strong>Deepak Dhavalikar</strong> (Brother, MGP, Priol)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td><strong>Babush Monserrate</strong> (Congress, St. Cruz)</td>
  <td><strong>Jennifer Monserrate</strong> (Wife, Congress,
  Taleigaon)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td><strong>Pandurang Madkaikar</strong> (Congress, Cumbarjua)</td>
  <td>Dhaku Madkaikar (Bother, Congress, Priol)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td><strong>Ravi Naik</strong> (Congress, Ponda)</td>
  <td>Ritesh Naik (Son, Congress, Madkai)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>Churchill Alemao (Congress, Navelim)</td>
  <td>Valanka Alemao (Daughter, Congress, Benaulim)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Joaquim Alemao (Congress, Cuncolim)</td>
  <td>Yuri Alemao (Son, NCP, Sanguem)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>2017</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td><strong>Pratapsingh Rane</strong> (Congress, Poriem)</td>
  <td><strong>Vishwajit Rane</strong> (Son, Independent, Valpoi)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Babush Monserrate (UGP, Panaji)</td>
  <td><strong>Jennifer Monserrate</strong> (Wife, Congress,
  Taleigaon)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td><strong>Sudin Dhavalikar</strong> (MGP, Madkai)</td>
  <td>Deepak Dhavalikar (Brother, MGP, Priol)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td><strong>Pandurang Madkaikar</strong> (BJP, Cumbarjua)</td>
  <td>Dhaku Madkaikar (Brother, Independent, St. Andre)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td><strong>Churchill Alemao</strong> (NCP, Benaulim)</td>
  <td><strong>Joaquim Alemao</strong> (Brother, Independent,
  Cuncolim)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td><strong>Babu Kavlekar</strong> (Congress, Quepem)</td>
  <td>Savitri Kavlekar (Wife, Congress, Sanguem)</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Elected candidates are shown in <strong>bold</strong></p>
  <p>Similarly, the brother duo Churchill and Joaquim Alemao were
  holding the influential portfolios of PWD and Urban Development in the
  same ministry. In the Manohar Parrikar-led government from 2012,
  another brother duo Sudin and Dipak Dhavalikar were ministers with
  important portfolios like PWD, Transport, Cooperation etc. And in the
  subsequent government of Dr Pramod Sawant after Parrikar’s demise,
  Jennifer Monserrate is the revenue minister while her husband Babush
  is the chairman of the Panaji Planning and Development Authority
  (PPDA).</p>
  <p>The tradition continues with nine duos within the families planning
  to contest the 2022 Assembly election. In fact some of them are
  negotiating with more than one political party and even jumping out
  from one party to another to bargain for their joint tickets. These
  are husband Babush and wife Jennifer Monserrate, brothers Sudin and
  Dipak Dhavalikar, husband Babu and wife Savitri Kavalekar, husband
  Michael and wife Delilah, husband Vishwajit and wife Divya Rane,
  husband Kiran and wife Kavita Kandolkar, father Ravi and son Ritesh
  Naik, brothers Rohan and Rajesh Khaunte, as well as father Churchill
  and daughter Valanka Alemao.</p>
  <p>The dangers of this increasing trend of broker-politicians were
  experienced by Goans through the most controversial Regional Plan Goa
  2011, known as RPG-11, when Babush Monserrate was heading the town and
  country planning ministry in 2006 in the Congress government led by
  Pratapsingh Rane. Though the legislators were dormant to the plan, the
  alert Niz Goenkars rose against it, led a state-wide historic
  agitation under the banner of the Goa Bachao Abhiyan and got the
  destructive RPG11 scrapped. In 2007, Digambar Kamat took over as the
  new Congress CM, and formed a Task Force of nationally reputed Goa
  architects and town planners under the chairmanship of internationally
  renowned architect Charles Correa. They later also framed a new RPG21,
  banning conversion of cultivable land and laying down guidelines for
  restricted construction activity by demarcating Economically Sensitive
  Zones as well as restricted Zones for village panchayats.</p>
  <p>Even after this, the cases against violation of the RPG21
  guidelines are piling up in the courts of law. In fact the major case
  the High Court of Bombay at Goa is hearing since 2018 is the
  controversial amendment passed by the Assembly on 30 July 2018. It was
  moved by then TCP Minister Vijai Sardesai, in the coalition government
  headed by Manohar Parrikar. A new section 16B was inserted in the TCP
  Act:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“16B. Change of zone in Regional Plan.—</p>
  <p>(1) If at any time, after the Regional Plan comes into operation,
  the Chief Town Planner (Planning) receives a written request from any
  person for change of zone of his land in the Regional Plan, he shall,
  after carrying out such fresh surveys and examination of the matter as
  may be considered necessary, submit his report to the Board and the
  Government, along with plan showing details about change of zone in
  the Regional Plan…</p>
  <p>(4) After the Regional Plan comes into operation, the Chief Town
  Planner (Planning) may, with the prior approval of the Government,
  make such changes in such Regional Plan as may be necessary for
  correcting any typographical or cartographical errors, omissions or
  details of proposals not fully indicated or changes arising out of the
  implementation of the proposals in the Regional Plan: Provided that
  all such changes are in the public interest and are notified to the
  public.”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Once again there was a public uproar, alleging that the hidden
  agenda of 16B was to change the agricultural zone to settlement and
  grant permissions for massive new commercial projects. TCP Minister
  Vijai Sardesai justified it, claiming that it would be done on a
  case-to-case basis and only in cases of public interest. Goa Congress
  President Girish Chodankar countered it, alleging that it would be on
  suitcase-to-suitcase basis. Finally, the Goa Bachao Abhiyan and others
  challenged the controversial amendment bill in the high court in
  November 2018. The hearing was not complete till December 2021.
  Meanwhile, the high court allowed the government to consider the
  proposals of changing the zones but no approval could be granted till
  the case is decided. The high court in its interim directive
  stated:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“In the meantime, we direct that any action that may be taken in
  pursuance of Section 16B of the Goa Town and Country Planning Act,
  1974, shall be subject to the outcome of the present petition. This
  position is made clear so that no parties can claim any equities.”<a
  href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Accordingly, the TCP Board started entertaining applications for
  land conversions under Section 16B, processing it and even granting
  ‘provisional approvals’, pending the court directive. Since the
  hearing also got delayed due to the Covid19 pandemic, the GBA lawyer
  Adv Norma Alvares requested the court to restrain the TCP from
  considering further applications.</p>
  <p>After hearing both the sides, the high court observed: “<em>Taking
  into consideration the fact that no final approvals have been granted
  relying upon the impugned provision or the fact that it is not likely
  that even provisional approvals are likely to be granted upon the
  fresh proposals received for at least the next two months, we make no
  further orders on the request of Ms. Alvares.</em>”<a href="#fn19"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
  <p>Was it an error committed by the court in allowing the government
  to process the applications for land conversions under section 16B? Or
  was it a deliberate move by the learned judges to verify what kind of
  applications are received, from whom, for what purpose and who are the
  people willing to convert their cultivable land? Whatever may be the
  intention, the applications received by the TCP were an eye
  opener.</p>
  <h2 id="over-2-crore-square-metres">Over 2 Crore Square Metres?</h2>
  <p>After passing this controversial amendment of 16B in July 2018, two
  leading politicians held the town and country planning portfolios.
  Vijai Sardesai for one year, till July 2019, and from then till fresh
  elections, Babu Kavlekar. In reply to the question asked by Leader of
  the Opposition Digambar Kamat, Kavlekar told the Assembly in February
  2020 that 5601 applications have been received for converting
  cultivable zones into settlement. Due to the assurance given to the
  High Court, no applications have been processed after November 2019.<a
  href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref20"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a></p>
  <p>The Assembly records show that applications for zone conversions
  have come from all across Goa and all the 12 talukas. In fact, more
  applications have come from the villages than the cities, with a
  maximum applied for settlement zones. The lands are also paddy fields,
  orchards, natural cover, under irrigation command area, and even
  within the coastal regulation zones. They are either for housing
  colonies or hotels and resorts. Hardly any proposals are for public
  institutions, in ‘public interest’.</p>
  <p>The next table shows taluka-wise conversion applications placed
  before the TCP Board when Vijai Sardesai was the TCP minister till
  July 2019.</p>
  <p>CONVERSION APPLICATIONS DURING VIJAI SARDESAI’S TENURE</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TALUKA</th>
  <th>APPLICATIONS</th>
  <th>AREA (sq.mt)</th>
  <th>%</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Pernem</td>
  <td>530</td>
  <td>3929400</td>
  <td>20</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>1021</td>
  <td>3609975</td>
  <td>19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td>1401</td>
  <td>2220587</td>
  <td>12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tiswadi</td>
  <td>205</td>
  <td>1789033</td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>400</td>
  <td>1755931</td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td>754</td>
  <td>1745478</td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>538</td>
  <td>1515929</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>88</td>
  <td>1025612</td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sattari</td>
  <td>320</td>
  <td>537980</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Dharbandora</td>
  <td>116</td>
  <td>514430</td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td>75</td>
  <td>269288</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>259407</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>5531</td>
  <td>19173050</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>PROVISIONAL APPROVALS: VIJAI SARDESAI’S TENURE</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>Date</th>
  <th>Applications</th>
  <th>Area (sq.mt.)</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>10-01-2019</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>440499</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>28-02-2019</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>691505</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>10-07-2019</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>168200</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td>1300204</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Assembly Questions; Digambar Kamat on 25-07-19 &amp; Vijai
  Sardesai on 19-10-21</p>
  <p>All these 5531 applications were processed and were in different
  phases of scrutiny, involving over 1.91 crore square metres of
  cultivable land. Topping the list is Pernem taluka with nearly 40 lakh
  square metres of cultivable land and then comes Bardez with around 36
  lakh square metres of land. Both are tourism zones. The maximum land
  in Pernem taluka proposed to be converted is in Mandrem constituency.
  Likewise with the coastal belt of Bardez taluka. Half of the land
  sought to be converted lies in the three talukas of Pernem, Bardez and
  Ponda, involving nearly 98 lakh square metres of cultivable land. More
  than half of the applications are also from these three talukas. The
  zone conversion applications received in Mandrem constituency of
  Pernem taluka, within a six months period of December 2018 to May
  2019, under 16B, numbered 373. The land proposed to be converted is
  around 33.88 lakh square metres. The major chunk of it, around 21 lakh
  square metres, is owned by J M Township Real Estates Pvt Ltd, a
  Mumbai-based real estate company, which has tied up with a local
  company running a casino in Goa.</p>
  <p>Interestingly, Vijai Sardesai asked a question in the Assembly
  after he was dropped from the cabinet and was forced to sit in the
  opposition, to know how many more people have applied for land
  conversion during the tenure of his successor Babu Kavlekar. This
  table is being compiled, based on the Assembly reply.</p>
  <p>TCPB MEETINGS DURING BABU KAVLEKAR TENURE</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TCPB Meeting</th>
  <th style="text-align: right;">Applications</th>
  <th style="text-align: right;">Area (sq. mt.)</th>
  <th>Status</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>11-10-2019</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">87</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">84481</td>
  <td>Provisional Approval</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>30-06-2021</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">32</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">1218860</td>
  <td>Provisional Approval</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL APPROVED</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">119</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">1303341</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>30-06-2021</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">71</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">503660</td>
  <td>Considered</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>30-06-2021</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">9</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">184351</td>
  <td>Deferred</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>03-02-2021</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">59</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">402557</td>
  <td>Processed</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>GRAND TOTAL</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">258</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">2393909</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Assembly Question: Vijai Sardesai on 19-10-21</p>
  <p>These tables are not foolproof. TCP Minister Kavlekar, in a reply
  to another question asked by his predecessor Vijai Sardesai, told the
  Assembly that a total 878 provisional approvals have been given by the
  TCP Board from April 2017, when the Parrikar government was formed.<a
  href="#fn21" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref21"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a> Out of these, I could trace
  records of only 148 applications approved, 29 during Sardesai’s tenure
  and 119 during Kavlekar’s. Barely 14 per cent of the applications. But
  that itself reveals that over 26 lakhs square metres of cultivable
  land have been provisionally approved to be converted. The figures of
  730 more applications are still unknown.</p>
  <p>Also in the pipeline at various stages are a total of 5670
  applications. What it means in simple terms is that if proposals
  received during the whole tenure of the BJP governments led by Manohar
  Parrikar and Dr Pramod Sawant are counted and if the high court gives
  a green signal to the controversial clause of 16B, then Goa would lose
  forever the cultivable land of two crore and twenty five lakh square
  metres!</p>
  <p>While browsing through the list of applications available in the
  Assembly replies, I could trace some applications made by our own
  lawmakers, present and former, who had ‘unanimously supported’ the
  Regional Plan 2021. The RPG21 clearly stated that no zone changing
  would be allowed for the next 10 years, especially for settlement
  purposes. This table lists out applications made by present and former
  MLAs, to convert zones from paddy fields, natural cover, private
  forest, land under irrigation command area, and even no development
  zone. The table is self-explanatory.</p>
  <p>ZONE CHANGE FROM REGIONAL PLAN 2021 APPLIED 2021 APPLIED BY LEADING
  POLITICIANS, EX-MLAS &amp; MLAS FOR CONVERSION TO SETTLEMENT</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>No</th>
  <th>Applicant</th>
  <th>Related MLA</th>
  <th>Party</th>
  <th style="text-align: right;">Sq.Mts</th>
  <th>Location</th>
  <th>Original Status</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1</td>
  <td>Deepak Dhavlikar</td>
  <td>Deepak Dhavalikar</td>
  <td>MGP MLA (Ex)</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">393100</td>
  <td>Dharbandora</td>
  <td>Error marking eco-sensitive zone</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Rajendra V Deshprabhu</td>
  <td>Vasudev Deshprabhu</td>
  <td>MGP Candidate</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">225000</td>
  <td>Arambol</td>
  <td>Orchard, Within High Tide Line</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>3</td>
  <td>Jit Arolkar</td>
  <td>Jit Arolkar</td>
  <td>MGP Candidate</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">65302</td>
  <td>Dhargalim, Torxem, Virnoda</td>
  <td>Orchard, Paddy Field, Cultivable land, Irrigation command
  area</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Harish Zantye</td>
  <td>Pravin Zantye</td>
  <td>BJP MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">26320</td>
  <td>Sarvona, Bicholim</td>
  <td>Partly paddy field</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Alex Sequeira</td>
  <td>Aleixo Sequeira</td>
  <td>Congress MLA (Ex)</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">18075</td>
  <td>Nuvem, Salcete</td>
  <td>Orchard and Natural Cover</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>6</td>
  <td>Sandhya Naresh Sawal</td>
  <td>Naresh Sawal</td>
  <td>MGP MLA (Ex)</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">13975</td>
  <td>Latambarce, Bicholim</td>
  <td>Natural Cover</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Anil Hoble</td>
  <td>Anil Hoble</td>
  <td>BJP Candidate</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">11546</td>
  <td>Morombi-o-Grande, Tiswadi</td>
  <td>Paddy Fields</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>8</td>
  <td>Pratapsingh Rane</td>
  <td>Pratapsingh Rane</td>
  <td>Congress MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">11465</td>
  <td>Podocem, Sattari</td>
  <td>Partly natural cover with irrigation command area &amp; canal
  abutting to the property</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>9</td>
  <td>Laxmikant Parsekar</td>
  <td>Laxmikant Parsekar</td>
  <td>BJP MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">10000</td>
  <td>Arambol</td>
  <td>Orchard, Cultivable Land, Salt Pan</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>10</td>
  <td>Madkaikar Builder</td>
  <td>Pandurang Madkaikar</td>
  <td>BJP MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">9475</td>
  <td>Old Goa, Tiswadi</td>
  <td>Orchard with Archaeological Parks</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>11</td>
  <td>Rajesh Khaunte</td>
  <td>Rohan Khaunte</td>
  <td>Ind MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">8445</td>
  <td>Azossim, Tiswadi</td>
  <td>Partly Paddy Field &amp; Khazan</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Naresh Sawal</td>
  <td>Naresh Sawal</td>
  <td>MGP MLA (Ex)</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">7219</td>
  <td>Latambarce, Bicholim</td>
  <td>Partly Natural Cover</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>13</td>
  <td>Dhaku Madkaikar</td>
  <td>Pandurang Madkaikar</td>
  <td>Ind Candidate</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">2475</td>
  <td>Candola, Ponda</td>
  <td>Partly Natural Cover</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>14</td>
  <td>Tonia Estates</td>
  <td>Alexio Sequeira</td>
  <td>Congress MLA (Ex)</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">1575</td>
  <td>Colva, Salcete</td>
  <td>Orchard</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>15</td>
  <td>Madkaikar Builder</td>
  <td>Pandurang Madkaikar</td>
  <td>BJP MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">1210</td>
  <td>Gaundalim, Tiswadi</td>
  <td>VP2 Category settlement</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>16</td>
  <td>Megha M Azgaonkar</td>
  <td>Babu Azgaonkar</td>
  <td>BJP MLA</td>
  <td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
  <td>Dhargalim, Pernem</td>
  <td>Orchard</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Assembly Questions and replies by Town &amp; Country
  Planning Dept, Govt of Goa Three-Fourth Illegal Tourism</p>
  <h2 id="three-fourth-illegal-tourism">Three-Fourth Illegal
  Tourism</h2>
  <p>After mining, tourism has been the economic backbone of Goa. It is
  flourishing day by day, not only as an international tourist
  destination but the most favoured destination of Corporate India and
  its executive class. However, its focus on beach tourism combined with
  vice tourism has resulted in the promotion of all kinds of immoral
  activities including prostitution, gambling, and consumption of drugs.
  Politicians have been accusing each other of protecting the underworld
  mafias and patronising the vice tourism. The coastland, predominantly
  located in the Old Conquests and also in parts of Pernem and Canacona,
  has thus become a hotspot of all kinds of illegalities and abuse of
  land.</p>
  <p>Under the full protection of Goa’s political class, tourism all
  along the coast was ‘developed’ by mercilessly cutting all the
  protective sand dunes and the coastal vegetation to construct hotels
  and star resorts. Due to this mindless destruction of the coastland,
  Goa’s beaches are today facing sand erosion while Goa has not escaped
  from the worldwide phenomenon of rising sea levels. Similar is the
  fate of our six prime rivers. In order to control the future
  devastation of the coastal belt and protect the coastal ecology, the
  Government of India issued a Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) in 1991
  under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. It was further amended
  from time to time since new loopholes were found which were arrested
  by the courts.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“In most of these areas, an area of 200 metres from the High Tide
  Line (HTL) has been declared as a no development zone. Several
  restrictions have been imposed for carrying out the development in the
  area between 200 to 500 metres from HTL. These measures have been
  adopted to protect the fragile ecosystem, which exists in the said
  area and which is vital to sustain ecological balance.”<a href="#fn22"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref22"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>22</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Accordingly the Coastal Regulation Zones were divided into
  categories, like CRZ I, where no new constructions shall be permitted;
  CRZ II, where buildings shall be permitted only in the landward side
  of the existing road and no permission for construction of buildings
  on landward side of new roads; CRZ III is the area where up to 200
  metres from the HTL is earmarked as ‘No Development Zone’.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“Goa Coast Line remained pristine till early 1970s. Human pressure
  on the coastal ecosystem started in the 1970s when tourism became a
  major source of revenue. This resulted in 80% of the urban growth
  being located along the coastal talukas. There has been a
  proliferation of hotels, resorts, residential flats, dwellings, small
  restaurants, beach side bars, roads and beach shacks along the coast.
  This has resulted in dense population, deterioration of the quality of
  life, loss of biodiversity and adverse effects on beaches, dunes,
  mangroves, water bodies and ‘Khazan lands’ – (reclaimed lowlands).</p>
  <p>The main purpose of the CRZ notification was to control and
  minimise environmental damage to the coastal ecosystem. The Goa State
  Committee for coastal environment was empowered to enforce the
  provision of the notification. Despite this, blatant violation of CRZ
  provision through anthropogenic activities have resulted in severe
  negative impacts on coastal ecosystem like rapid elimination of sand
  dunes, damage to dune vegetation, increasing mobility of sand,
  transport of sand islands, instability of dunes, denudation of hill
  slopes, deposition of sediments into estuaries, progressive built up
  of plastic litter, reduction in mangroves, wetlands and breeding
  grounds of marine life, localised shore line erosion and seasonal salt
  water ingress.”<a href="#fn23" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref23"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>23</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The Remote Sensing Survey Instruments of Hyderabad conducted an
  extensive survey in 2006 of the whole Goan coastline as well as the
  river line with the help of satellite data of 1991 and 2005, aerial
  photographs of 1993 as well as the actual physical survey including
  the field survey. These were the findings of the structures that have
  come up in violation of the CRZ guidelines all along the Goan coast as
  well as on the banks of six rivers of Goa.</p>
  <p>STRUCTURES VIOLATING CRZ ON THE COAST: 1991-2006</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TALUKA</th>
  <th>VILLAGES IN 1991</th>
  <th>MORE TILL 2006</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  <th>ILLEGAL</th>
  <th>%</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>1802</td>
  <td>1585</td>
  <td>3387</td>
  <td>35</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>9</td>
  <td>333</td>
  <td>802</td>
  <td>1135</td>
  <td>56</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>959</td>
  <td>781</td>
  <td>1740</td>
  <td>18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pernem</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>621</td>
  <td>764</td>
  <td>1385</td>
  <td>14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>1445</td>
  <td>569</td>
  <td>2014</td>
  <td>21</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>91</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>151</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>31</td>
  <td>5251</td>
  <td>4561</td>
  <td>9812</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Remote Sensings Instruments, Hyderabad</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>Analysis of the results of the first phase study in the CRZIII
  (between 200 m and 500 m from the HTL towards land) along the entire
  Goa Coast showed that in almost all the 35 villages the number of
  structures / dwelling units have increased compared to the situation
  at the time of enactment of CRZ legislation in 1991. The increase has
  been very significant in Querim, Arambol, Mandrem and Morjim villages
  in Pernem taluka, Anjuna, Candolim and Calangute villages in Bardez
  taluka, Colva, Benaulim, Varca and Cavelossim villages in Salcete
  taluka and Cola, Agonda, Nagorce-Palolem, Poinguinim and Loliem
  villages in Canacona taluka.<a href="#fn24" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref24" role="doc-noteref"><sup>24</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Bardez tops the list with a maximum number of 1585 new structures
  that have come up in 15 years, that too only in three villages:
  Calangute: 685, Candolim: 620 and Anjuna: 280. Comparatively, though
  Salcete taluka is second on the list with 802 structures, it comprises
  nine villages. Maximum among them are Cavelossim with 330 structures,
  250 in Varca, 215 in Colva and 199 in Benaulim. Also in Mormugao, the
  third taluka of the Old Conquests, there were 569 new structures found
  in eight villages. Maximum among them are the 128 structures in
  Velsao. But the survey report does not mention how big the structures
  are. Goa’s top star hotels are located in the coastal belt of these
  three talukas.</p>
  <p>The spread of structures within the CRZ is also found in three
  talukas and 11 villages of Pernem, Canacona and Quepem. Quitol in
  Quepem did not have a single structure till 1991, but 11 new
  structures came up in the CRZ in 15 years. Though tourism is spreading
  more widely in Pernem in four villages, and Palolem village alone in
  Canacona surpasses all the other villages of the New Conquests. It has
  777 new structures including one seven star resort out of a total 781.
  Next in line is Arambol in Pernem taluka with 628 structures, 409 in
  Morjim, 203 in Mandrem, and 145 in Querim. Agonda in Canacona is
  rising with 365 structures and 320 in Cola. And it is not only on the
  beachside. Riverside tourism is also increasing rapidly. The CRZ
  violations were also found increasing even on the banks of six major
  rivers of Goa.</p>
  <p>STRUCTURES VIOLATING CRZ ON RIVER BANKS: 1991-2006</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>RIVER</th>
  <th>VILLAGES</th>
  <th>IN 1991</th>
  <th>IN 2006</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  <th>AVERAGE/VILLAGE</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Tiracol</td>
  <td>10</td>
  <td>242</td>
  <td>190</td>
  <td>442</td>
  <td>19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Mandovi</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>1795</td>
  <td>786</td>
  <td>2623</td>
  <td>19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Zuari</td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td>611</td>
  <td>449</td>
  <td>1084</td>
  <td>19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Sal</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>208</td>
  <td>190</td>
  <td>409</td>
  <td>17</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Chapora</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>890</td>
  <td>349</td>
  <td>1261</td>
  <td>16</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>113</td>
  <td>3872</td>
  <td>2067</td>
  <td>6052</td>
  <td>18</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Remote Sensings Instruments, Hyderabad</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>Analysis of second phase work showed that in the CRZ-I of Tiracol
  river a maximum number of structures (117) have come up in Pernem
  village… (It) showed that new structures/dwelling units have come up
  almost in all the villages along the rivers, most significantly in
  Pernem village, along Tiracol river; Parcem, Colvale and Camurlim
  villages along Chapora river; Panaji, Penha da Franca and Reis Magos
  villages along Mandovi river; Taleigao, Goa Velha, Cortalim villages
  along Zuari river; Cavelossim and Velim villages along Sal river and
  Poinguinim and Nagorcem-Palolem villages along Talpona river.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>However, if this table is analysed by taking the average number of
  structures that have come up in each village (see the last column of
  the table), then we find that more structures are coming up along the
  Talpona river of Canacona, which has only four villages. It means the
  illegalities committed in the tourism belt are now witnessed not only
  on the coastland but also the midland.</p>
  <p>The trend in the last 15 years also seems to be similar, with
  illegalities in terms of CRZ violations found to be more rampant in
  the three talukas of the New Conquests, along with the Old Conquests.
  No data is available in this regard, but the cases of CRZ violation in
  the High Court of Bombay at Goa as well as the National Green Tribunal
  are mounting day by day while the politicians are openly accusing the
  Green activists, especially the Goa Foundation, for “<em>creating
  obstacles in developing Goa.</em>” Dr Claude Alvares and his activist
  lawyer wife Adv Norma Alvares have become number one enemies of the
  Goa Assembly, across the party lines.</p>
  <p>Growing through this in Goa is illegal tourism, just like illegal
  mining. The issue was first raised by Serafino Cota, a hotelier from
  Carmona and the president of Goa Small and Medium Hotel Owners’
  Association. He succeeded in convincing the influential Travel and
  Tourism Association of Goa about this hidden truth. I once brought
  both these tourism bodies as well as top officials of Goa Tourism
  Development Corporation and Tourism Department together for a TV
  debate.</p>
  <p>The revelations were quite shocking.</p>
  <p>TTAG President Savio Messias alleged that 60 per cent of hotels and
  other structures accommodating tourists in Goa are not registered.
  While only 600 hotels are registered in the A and B categories, the
  actual number is 3000! Cota added to this, claiming that the total
  number of illegal rooms is over 10,000. And the entire racket of
  illegal tourism runs under the nose of the tourism authorities through
  online booking.</p>
  <p>Cota explained the simplest modus operandi of illegal tourism.
  First a hotelier builds a small resort with around 10 rooms, which is
  registered. But the online booking is made for 20, 30, or even 100
  rooms sometimes, which are the holiday homes built adjacent to the
  registered resort. The second method is that online booking companies
  are holding the keys of these holiday homes and even flats, mostly
  purchased by the outsiders. In both the cases, accommodations are
  provided at much cheaper rates than the official room tariff since
  they don’t need to pay any kind of fees or taxes to the government.
  While admitting the fact that the growth in the number of tourists is
  10 to 12 per cent in road, rail and air traffic, the GTDC official
  informed that 10 to 12 new hotels are registered in Goa every
  week.</p>
  <p>Soon came the Covid19 pandemic and Pandora’s Box was opened. Chief
  Minister Dr Pramod Sawant, in the official cabinet note of 8 April
  2020, stated that “<em>the authorities have identified 589 foreign
  tourists stranded in the registered hotels and guest houses. This
  number excludes the tourists staying in un-registered hotels, guest
  houses etc. However, as per the data available with the FRRO, it is
  estimated that more than 2500 foreigners alone were
  stranded.</em>”</p>
  <p>It meant that the government was fully aware of the unregistered
  hotels and other kinds of accommodations, which were run with
  political patronage and bureaucratic protection. But the actual number
  of foreign tourists was much beyond even the estimates worked out by
  the FRRO. The last official report of 24 May 2020 available stated
  that a total 7774 foreign tourists left Goa in 39 special flights
  arranged by the companies who booked them online.<a href="#fn25"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref25" role="doc-noteref"><sup>25</sup></a>
  And only 589 among them were found in registered hotels.</p>
  <p>What it meant is that 12 times more number of foreign tourists were
  living in Goa, that too at the fag end of the tourism season, from
  February onwards. This number does not include the domestic tourists.
  Officially, in 2018-19, Goa received a total 79.38 lakhs of tourists,
  out of which 70.08 lakhs were domestic tourists (88%) and 9.30 lakhs
  were foreigners (12%).<a href="#fn26" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref26" role="doc-noteref"><sup>26</sup></a> It also meant that
  when we had 7774 foreign tourists in Goa, there were 57,000 domestic
  tourists here. And with the same calculation if we go further and
  calculate 79.38 lakh tourists, then the total number of tourists goes
  above nine crores! Maybe this is an exaggeration since we don’t know
  how many domestic and foreign tourists live in the unregistered
  hotels, guesthouses, etc.</p>
  <p>But finally the cat was out of the bag. The tourism department took
  a serious note of this revelation. As the tourism industry was the
  worst hit due to the pandemic, the authorities pulled up their sleeves
  and prepared an excellent document on “<em>Survival and Revival of
  Goa’s Tourism Industry,</em>” a survey carried out by the Goa Tourism
  department. It was conducted, analysed, and concluded with firm and
  stern proposals. The report also estimates the actual tourist footfall
  at 1.5 crores. Almost 71 lakhs of illegal tourists!</p>
  <p>What does it say about illegal tourism?</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“Growth? Decline? Overgrowth? Whom to believe? The media, the
  industry, citizens and official data all seem to be telling a
  different story about the current fate of tourism in Goa. Where lies
  the truth? This report is in the opinion that, in fact, these
  narratives are all exact and happening simultaneously. Goa has
  recorded a growth in tourism footfall in the last few years, and yet
  hoteliers have been reporting a decline in their occupancy rate. This
  paradox seems largely due to the prevalence of informal/unregistered
  activities.</p>
  <p>For accommodations, for instance, this report estimates that more
  than 70 percent of rooms available in Goa are outthe- radar from
  official data – this may include unregistered hotels, unregistered
  rooms or second homes rented to tourists on online platforms. As a
  consequence, given the inflation in the number of available rooms,
  formal registered units are facing harsher and harsher competition.
  The cake might get bigger – since the absolute number of tourists is
  increasing – but the pieces are getting smaller as more businesses are
  competing…</p>
  <p>‘Illegal hotels are the elephant in the room: everybody knows about
  it’ told the owner of a hotel. Unregistered activities include
  business units operating without licence or operating at a higher
  volume of activities than officially declared (for instance a hotel
  with a licence for 20 rooms actually running 30 rooms). The Small and
  Medium Hoteliers’ Association estimates that up to 87% of rooms
  available for tourists in Goa are unregistered. The present survey
  estimates that the overall proportion of tourism activities operating
  without registration could be up to 43%...</p>
  <p>The number of registered units was collected from the database of
  the Department of Tourism while the number of unregistered units was
  estimated based on the data available on online platforms such as Oyo,
  Airbnb, and Booking.com, inputs from tourism associations and
  observations on the field. In addition to these registered and
  unregistered units, the survey also considered other tourism
  activities which do not require registration at the Department of
  Tourism, restaurants and other ancillary entities. In total, it was
  estimated that 39,694 business tourists – formal or informal - are
  currently operating in the tourism sector in Goa.<a href="#fn27"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref27"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>27</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>ILLEGAL TOURISM OF GOA: ACCOMMODATION</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>HOTELS ETC</th>
  <th>LEGAL</th>
  <th>ILLEGAL</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  <th>ILLEGAL %</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>A Category Hotels</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>91</td>
  <td>16</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>B Category Hotels</td>
  <td>252</td>
  <td>101</td>
  <td>353</td>
  <td>29</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>C Category Hotels</td>
  <td>715</td>
  <td>532</td>
  <td>1247</td>
  <td>43</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>D Category Hotels</td>
  <td>2784</td>
  <td>4872</td>
  <td>7656</td>
  <td>64</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Villas</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>400</td>
  <td>408</td>
  <td>98</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Flats, Vacation Homes</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>6000</td>
  <td>6000</td>
  <td>100</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>3835</td>
  <td>11920</td>
  <td>15755</td>
  <td>76</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Survival &amp; Revival of Goa’s Tourism Industry, A survey
  by GTDC, Govt of Goa</p>
  <p>The TTAG and Small Hoteliers’ Association were alleging that 60 per
  cent of hotels etc. are illegal. But here is the official report which
  estimates that 76 per cent are illegal. The report has also suggested
  an Action Plan, in terms of action to be taken by the Government of
  Goa. Regarding the unregistered illegal units, it has suggested that a
  circular be issued by the Department of Tourism to register within 30
  days, failing which a penal action would be taken.</p>
  <p>The illegal tourism is a direct reply to the question of why so
  many hotels, resorts, villas, holiday homes, real estate projects and
  colonies are proposed to be set up by applying under 16b of the TCP
  Act in the no-development zones earmarked by the Regional Plan 2021.
  The GTDC report also proposes development of hinterland tourism while
  there are also hundreds of proposals for conversion of cultivable land
  into settlement zones. In fact these proposals also include some big
  private firms and companies listing out thousands of square metres of
  land for conversion. Though the GTDC report is one of the best
  documents ever produced on how to develop Goa’s tourism, it raises
  eyebrows regarding some proposals, on the lines of the controversial
  clause of 16B in the TCP Act. The GTDC report talks about land
  parcels:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>Provision of land parcel for increased tenure: Getting land parcels
  for commercial development can be challenging in Goa’s hinterland, as
  most of the area is under forest cover or under no development zone.
  Also, in order to maintain a balance between the ecology of the area
  and the interests of investors, the government should provide land
  parcels for restricted development but for a longer tenure or lease.
  The increased tenure will enhance the feasibility of a project and the
  government will also be able to control the development of the
  sensitive area. Land will be provided on a case-to-case basis upon
  acceptance by the single window clearance cell.</p>
  <p>Incentives to promote Homestays in Hinterland: Post Covid, a
  homestay in the hinterland could be an ideal accommodation for
  tourists to stay in Goa. To promote homestay facilities in the
  hinterlands, the government can provide following incentives:</p>
  <ul>
  <li>Waiving off the registration fee and the licence fee payable to
  the department of tourism for 2 years.</li>
  <li>To provide subsidy in utility charges such as electricity bill,
  water bill, etc. for 2 years.</li>
  <li>Free provision of government approved eco-responsible labels for
  the eligible accommodations to promote sustainable practices for 2
  years.</li>
  <li>Subsidy in municipal charges / corporation charges, property tax,
  excise, trade licences, food safety etc. for 2 years.</li>
  <li>Provision of land with increased tenure for glamping / camping
  accommodations.</li>
  <li>Relaxation in FAR</li>
  </ul>
  </blockquote>
  <h2 id="mind-our-mines">Mind ‘OUR’ MINES</h2>
  <p>The Second World War was a blessing in disguise for Portuguese Goa.
  Mining took off as an industry when Japan started importing Goa’s iron
  ore from 1950 onwards. The mine owners were the wealthiest class of
  Goa, who were fully backing the Portuguese government during the whole
  liberation movement while some ‘nationalist’ mine owners were also
  secretly supporting the freedom fighters. Also in independent Goa,
  from the first election of 1963 till date, the ‘mine owners’ is the
  most powerful lobby that has been controlling Goan politics and almost
  all the major political parties, no matter whether they are ruling or
  in the opposition. Goenchi Maati, the organisation floated by Dr
  Claude Alvares of Goa Foundation, has described the whole journey of
  Goa’s mining industry in a concise manner.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“Reports of minerals in Goa date back very far. There are reports
  that Jains living in Cudnem used to extract Gold in Goa. The existence
  of iron ore mines was known to the Portuguese from the early 1700s,
  but it was hushed up for fear of invasion by others. However, iron ore
  was extracted through the entire Portuguese period by certain groups,
  notably the tribe known as Dovolos, based in Navelim and other areas
  of Salcette.</p>
  <p>The first mining manifest was given in 1905… In 1910, a French
  company, Compagnie de Mines de Fer de Goa, made plans to extract
  manganese ore from the Bicholim area, and transport it by rail through
  Sanquelim, Ponda, Raia and Loutolim to Margao. Mining really took off
  after the World War as demand soared for the reconstruction. Japan in
  particular found it easier politically to import iron ore from
  Portuguese Goa instead of British India. By the time of liberation in
  1961, some 800 mining concessions had been granted.</p>
  <p>In 1987, after a number of previous efforts, the Indian Government
  passed the Abolition Act, which converted perpetual concessions into
  fixed term mining leases. The erstwhile concession holders were
  compensated under the Act for this change. There were two boom and
  bust cycles during this period, with busts in the late 1970s and early
  1990s. At the bottom, things were very difficult, and making money was
  a struggle. Mining was barely profitable. It is likely that a number
  of questionable practises began at this time.</p>
  <p>The China boom in the early 2000s caused iron ore prices to soar.
  Naturally, this was accompanied with a mad rush to extract everything
  and send it to China. Malpractices became commonplace. There were
  numerous PILs filed, and numerous mines shut down as well on different
  grounds. It all culminated with the release of the explosive Shah
  Commission Report in the Parliament, and the subsequent bans.</p>
  <p>During the Supreme Court hearings following the Shah Commission, it
  became clear that there were numerous, nay countless, serious
  violations by the miners. The Supreme Court changed direction. It
  ruled that all mining after 22-Nov-2007 was fully illegal, raising the
  prospect of recovering some of the loot, and making a fresh start for
  mining in Goa. The Supreme Court also ordered the creation of the Goa
  Iron Ore Permanent Fund, laying down the path for a fair to all mining
  system, which we are proposing.</p>
  <p>Yet the BJP government has thrown all this away, and restarted
  mining by renewing leases to the same miners. The estimated loss is
  Rs. 1,44,000 crores, Rs. 10 lakhs for every man, woman and child. If
  we do not act, how will we be remembered in history? The nalayak
  generation? The old fools?”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Justice Shah Commission said it’s a scam of Rs 35,000 crore and
  described it as a Theft, suggesting the people involved in the scam
  are nothing but Thieves. It was a daylight robbery. With the China
  boom, wheels had started moving in Goan politics while unabated mining
  had begun. Goa’s leading miner and owner of Fomento, Auduth Timblo
  personally took the initiative in 2004 to pull out three-time BJP MLA
  Digambar Kamat from the Manohar Parrikar-led BJP government and
  re-establish the Rane-led Congress government. Kamat continued to be
  the mining minister. After the 2007 Assembly election, Kamat was made
  the chief minister. Thanks to illegal mining and practically the whole
  political class jumping at the opportunity of looting Goa’s treasure,
  the Kamat-led Congress government completed the whole term without any
  trouble from any political party.</p>
  <p>At that moment, 117 mining leases were operational, covering 259
  square kilometres of land of Goa. CM Kamat had set up a Task Force and
  then the State Level Committee (SLC) under the chairmanship of
  internationally renowned architect Charles Correa along with India’s
  and Goa’s leading town planners, in order to prepare a new Regional
  Plan 2021. Besides mapping the cultivated land and marking zones for
  housing, the SLC also marked areas to develop agriculture, tourism,
  industry and even mining. It had also provided an Action Plan and how
  to phase out mining by providing an alternative to the mining
  dependent population. Perhaps for the first time, the areas of land of
  mining were classified into the forest, private forest, orchard,
  cultivated paddy fields, catchment area of water bodies, industrial
  areas as well as settlement areas.</p>
  <p>TYPE OF LAND OF ACTIVE MINING LEASES (2010): %</p>
  <p>| LEASES &amp; LAND | | | | | | | | SANGUEM | BICHOLIM | QUEPEM |
  SATTARI | TOTAL |
  |----------------|---------|----------|--------|---------|-------| |
  No of Leases | 66 | 38 | 10 | 18 | 132 | | Forest | 38 | 20 | 14 | 13
  | 27 | | Private Forest | 3 | 0 | 0.39 | 0 | 1 | | Orchard | 53 | 68 |
  74 | 72 | 62 | | Paddy Fields | 1 | 2 | 5 | 3 | 2 | | Water Bodies | 1
  | 2 | 3 | 4 | 2 | | Industry | 0.35 | 0.29 | 0.04 | 0 | 0.25 | |
  Settlement | 3 | 7 | 4 | 8 | 5 |</p>
  <p>Source: Release Two; Regional Plan of Goa 2021, Government of Goa P
  60-62</p>
  <p>The ‘mine owners’ of Goa still claim that they are not the lease
  holders but the owners of the mines since the Portuguese had given it
  to them as perpetual concessions. They have challenged the Goa, Daman
  and Diu Mining Concessions (Abolition and Declaration as Mining
  Leases) Act, 1987. It is still lying in the Supreme Court.</p>
  <p>By releasing a document regarding the types of land allotted for
  mining leases, the SLC in 2010 had listed out the kind of damage
  mining has caused in the midland and hinterland and brought it to the
  notice of Kamat government.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“Mining has caused incalculable direct and indirect damage to both
  the environment and the people in these areas - by affecting the
  quality of air, water and forests, as well as health, agriculture,
  employment and living conditions of the people. The major impacts are
  as under:</p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li>About 1110.81 hectares of forest land has been diverted to mining
  as per the data furnished by the Forest Dept.</li>
  <li>A number of mining leases are located in the catchment areas of
  water bodies and in the case of Selaulim dam, even within the buffer
  area of the dam. This threatens the quality and the holding capacity
  of this primary water source which caters to the entire South Goa
  district.</li>
  <li>There are no controls on the depth of the mines. As a result
  mining is done even below the water table at the cost of underground
  aquifers, causing acute water shortage in mining areas (should be
  brought under Goa Groundwater Regulation Act 2002).</li>
  <li>Open ore transportation by trucks is causing severe air pollution
  and disrupting the health and social lives of villagers in the mining
  talukas.</li>
  <li>Agriculture is severely affected in the areas around mines because
  of siltation and lack of ground water for irrigation.</li>
  <li>The siltation of the Zuari and Mandovi rivers is a direct result
  of the mining activities occurring upstream along these rivers and the
  failure of anti-erosion measures.</li>
  <li>Barge building activity has been mushrooming all along the river
  banks to keep up with the increase in mining activity.</li>
  </ol>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The SLC had also made 26 recommendations for sustainable mining,
  stating that action needs to be taken to minimise the brutal
  environmental fall-outs of mining, and for deciding on options for the
  future. Until this task is completed, the SLC had clearly suggested
  that no new mines should be allowed to start (including those with
  valid licences), nor should any new leases be considered.</p>
  <p>These recommendations are nothing different from what the Supreme
  Court has suggested to revive Goa’s mining. In fact the RPG21 had
  tackled the issue in a more holistic manner while the Supreme Court
  has limited its scope to have mining activity within a legal
  framework. The RPG21 has even suggested an alternative economy for the
  mining-dependent areas. If these recommendations were implemented
  immediately after the plan was submitted to the government, Goa would
  not have faced the blanket mining ban, due to which the associated
  people are suffering for the last 10 years. But neither Digambar Kamat
  during his remaining tenure nor Manohar Parrikar, who succeeded him
  and faced the mining ban, bothered to implement it. The whole
  political class, including the Communist Party of India and its AITUC
  trade union leader Christopher Fonseca, took pride in holding Dr
  Claude Alvares and his Goa Foundation responsible for the mining ban.
  Rather than accusing the thieves, the one who caught the thieves was
  blamed. These recommendations were made two years before even the Goa
  Foundation had approached the Supreme Court, seeking a ban on mining
  to put a stop to the madness of the whole political class in
  destroying Goa.</p>
  <p>Have a look at some of the crucial recommendations the Charles
  Correa Committee had made:</p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li>Bring an immediate halt to mining and dumping outside delineated
  and mapped 117 working Mining Leases.</li>
  <li>Terminating at earliest, from the 117 working mines, those mines
  which are located within 200 metres from existing settlement fences,
  200 m from river banks, Wild Life Sanctuaries and National Parks and
  within their surrounding one km buffer zones, 500 metres around ASI
  and State protected monuments and two kms from the boundary of the
  Submergence Area for reservoirs of the State Water Supply system, like
  Selaulim, Anjunem etc.</li>
  <li>Phase out, within the next three years, those mines that are
  located within 500 metres from the fence of settlement areas having a
  population of 100 persons, one km from the fence of settlement areas
  having a population of 500 persons and above, Catchment areas of
  Reservoirs of Selaulim and Anjunem and one km to two kms of the
  boundaries of the Wild Life Sanctuaries.</li>
  <li>No area or number of existing 117 mines should increase till
  2021.</li>
  <li>Leases from among 117 that are in Eco- I zone and have not yet
  been mined should not be allowed to start operation.</li>
  <li>Remaining non-operational 219 mining leases should not be allowed
  to start operation.</li>
  <li>Restrict mining above the water table.</li>
  <li>No new forest area to be diverted to mining since there is no land
  available in the State for compensatory afforestation.</li>
  <li>No transportation of topsoil beyond the lease area should be
  allowed as per mining regulations.</li>
  <li>In order to prevent malpractice, all mines must have all the
  necessary clearances under Environment Act, Air Act, Water Act, Forest
  Conservation Act, NOC from the National Board of Wildlife and
  Pollution Control Board as well as valid approval of mining lease from
  the government.</li>
  <li>Utilise mining for solving the existing land filling material
  scarcity for public projects like roads etc. This will help avoid
  unnecessary cutting of hills that is otherwise necessitated.</li>
  <li>Rehabilitate all non-working/closed mines for water harvesting and
  restoring damaged water tables.</li>
  <li>Make rehabilitation of farm land (Paddy Fields) an integral part
  of the Mining Policy. The owner should restore the land to its
  original use of forest, agriculture or orchard after the mine is
  exhausted.</li>
  <li>Examine the options of replacing ore-transported general roads
  either by a much narrower (18m) road, or by a dedicated mining covered
  conveyor belt system from the mining areas to the jetties.</li>
  <li>Construct a bypass road as a Growth corridor by 2021, which allows
  northbound and southbound traffic coming in from Belgaum to bifurcate
  and bypass Goa, which passes right through these devastated
  areas.</li>
  <li>Build new growth centres along this belt which will also help take
  the pressure off the coastal belt, their development should be on a
  fast track, and a new planning and implementation cell created to
  identify the land needed (preferably wasteland).</li>
  <li>Appoint a High Power Task Force to look at all the issues related
  to mining in the State and define a rational and long-term sustainable
  mining Policy for the State.</li>
  </ol>
  <p>Neither any government nor the two subsequent Assemblies of 2012
  and 2017 have even bothered to discuss this whole plan and its
  valuable recommendations. If it was implemented, mining would have not
  been banned by the Supreme Court, workers would have not been
  retrenched, mining-dependents would have not starved and Goan economy
  would have not been affected. But unfortunately Goa did not have a
  single lawmaker elected who could alert the authorities. Who was
  responsible for this most irresponsible attitude that led to the
  economic downfall of Goa?</p>
  <h2 id="rich-politicians-and-poor-politics">RICH POLITICIANS AND POOR
  POLITICS</h2>
  <p>There was a time when only the Congress was considered to be a poor
  party of rich politicians. But now it is across the board. Politics is
  a shortcut to become filthy rich within no time. This is a pan-India
  phenomenon. Prime Minister Narendra Modi came to power with a thumping
  majority in 2014 by assuring the people of India that he would get
  back the black money of corruption accumulated in India and the banks
  abroad. His experiment of demonetisation to get the black money out of
  bags, fight corruption, get rid of fake notes and contain terror
  funding failed miserably. Withdrawing currency notes of 1000 and 500
  denominations amounted to 86 per cent of India’s currency. Modi was
  expecting that one third of Rs 15 lakh crore would not be returned to
  the banks since it was ‘black’. But in reality, the Reserve Bank of
  India announced that 99.3 per cent of currency notes were
  deposited.</p>
  <p>RISE IN INCOME OF MLAS: 2007-2017 (Figures In Crores)</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>MLAS</th>
  <th>PARTY</th>
  <th>2007</th>
  <th>2012</th>
  <th>2017</th>
  <th>RISE %</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Deepak Dhavalikar</td>
  <td>MGP</td>
  <td>1.41</td>
  <td>13.40</td>
  <td>14.44</td>
  <td>924</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Babu Kavlekar</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>1.31</td>
  <td>5.31</td>
  <td>9.37</td>
  <td>615</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Laxmikant Parsekar</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>1.26</td>
  <td>10.74</td>
  <td>8.98</td>
  <td>613</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pandurang Madkaikar</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>5.07</td>
  <td>12.37</td>
  <td>32.18</td>
  <td>535</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Benjamin Silva</td>
  <td>Ind</td>
  <td>1.21</td>
  <td>2.86</td>
  <td>6.38</td>
  <td>427</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pratapsingh Rane</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>9.57</td>
  <td>25.87</td>
  <td>50.00</td>
  <td>422</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Luizinho Faleiro</td>
  <td>TMC</td>
  <td>1.77</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>9.09</td>
  <td>414</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Aleixo Reginald Lourenco</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>1.16</td>
  <td>5.17</td>
  <td>346</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Mauvin Godinho</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>2.73</td>
  <td>7.96</td>
  <td>10.74</td>
  <td>293</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Sudin Dhavalikar</td>
  <td>MGP</td>
  <td>3.00</td>
  <td>5.58</td>
  <td>10.58</td>
  <td>253</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Agnelo Fernandes</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>5.35</td>
  <td>10.16</td>
  <td>17.87</td>
  <td>234</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pravin Zantye</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>3.97</td>
  <td>5.55</td>
  <td>13.23</td>
  <td>233</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Digambar Kamat</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>3.23</td>
  <td>6.21</td>
  <td>10.74</td>
  <td>233</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Aleixo Sequeira</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>3.03</td>
  <td>9.38</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>210</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Vishwajit Rane</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>7.46</td>
  <td>6.28</td>
  <td>21.31</td>
  <td>186</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Vijay Sardesai</td>
  <td>GFP</td>
  <td>5.45</td>
  <td>25.21</td>
  <td>14.75</td>
  <td>171</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Jennifer Monserrate</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>11.49</td>
  <td>23.07</td>
  <td>30.81</td>
  <td>168</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Michael Lobo</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>20.69</td>
  <td>54.59</td>
  <td>164</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Ravi Naik</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>3.89</td>
  <td>7.09</td>
  <td>10.12</td>
  <td>160</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Churchill Alemao</td>
  <td>TMC</td>
  <td>5.61</td>
  <td>11.68</td>
  <td>13.06</td>
  <td>133</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Pramod Sawant</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>1.26</td>
  <td>2.78</td>
  <td>121</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Babush Monserrate</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>15.32</td>
  <td>23.07</td>
  <td>30.81</td>
  <td>101</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Joaquim Alemao</td>
  <td>Congress</td>
  <td>9.12</td>
  <td>31.26</td>
  <td>16.26</td>
  <td>78</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Subhash Shirodkar</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>1.10</td>
  <td>4.81</td>
  <td>1.93</td>
  <td>75</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Rohan Khaunte</td>
  <td>Ind</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>5.87</td>
  <td>9.34</td>
  <td>59</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Nilesh Cabral</td>
  <td>BJP</td>
  <td>-</td>
  <td>13.42</td>
  <td>19.95</td>
  <td>49</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Lavoo Mamledar</td>
  <td>TMC</td>
  <td>1.81</td>
  <td>1.35</td>
  <td>2.67</td>
  <td>48</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Source: Association of Democratic Reforms (ADR) (Party affiliation
  as on 15 December 2021)</p>
  <p>It is not an easy task to prove which politician is corrupt and who
  is not. There are different tactics used to hoodwink the income tax
  authorities and accumulate black money. But even then total income
  cannot be hidden. The Election Commission of India has now made it
  compulsory for the candidates to file an affidavit where the legal
  income needs to be shown. Since then, the Association of Democratic
  Reforms (ADR), the NGO, has been keeping a watch on the contestants
  and analysing their performance as well as their earnings, shown
  legally. The table supplied by the ADR has analysed the income shown
  by the contestants since 2007.</p>
  <p>Unlike the common man or the normal businessmen, the income of
  politicians is not only doubling in five years but raised by even over
  900 per cent, like in case of two-time MLA and one-time minister Dipak
  Dhavalikar. When these MLAs contested in 2017, the richest man among
  them was twotime MLA Michael Lobo, representing Goa’s tourist hotspot,
  Calangute. Pratapsingh Rane, the 11-time MLA and five-time chief
  minister, is next in the line. Then comes Pandurang Madkaikar, who
  travelled from the MGP to the Congress to the BJP; Babush and Jennifer
  Monserrate, Vishwajit Rane and so on. This has been a ‘rich journey’
  of Goan politicians, till 2017. The latest figures will be known when
  they file nominations for the 2022 poll. (The ADR did not provide
  figures of those MLAs who have expired, like Manohar Parrikar,
  Francisco D’Souza and Vishnu Wagh).</p>
  <p>In comparison, if we analyse the whole journey of Goan politics
  till date, what we observe is mindless misuse of our land rather than
  utilising it for the development of the people who cultivate this
  land. No thought is given to sustainable and balanced development of
  Goa that would not kill the villages and congest the cities. It is not
  just mining or agriculture or tourism or industry, but the Politics of
  Business and the Business of Politics that has ruined Goa by the
  short-sighted political class of Goa. The vision of Bhausaheb
  Bandodkar and Dr Jack de Sequeira has absolutely faded away.</p>
  <p>For example, Goa’s urban population is today not less than 10
  lakhs. We also receive 1.50 crores of tourists every year, meaning on
  an average 12.50 lakh tourists every month. This whole lot of around
  22 lakhs needs on a daily basis vegetables, rice, wheat, cereals,
  fruits, flowers, milk, eggs, meat etc. Goa is certainly equipped
  enough with the basic natural resources like land and water required
  to produce these necessities. But the sad part of Goa’s ‘developing
  economy’ is that the land available to cultivate it is either lying
  idle, barren or is being converted every day for short-term monetary
  gains. Instead, we import all these necessities from the neighbouring
  states at a much higher cost, making our economy costly.</p>
  <p>In short, Goa’s politics has been moving around the Land right from
  the ancient period till date. It has gone through many phases of
  community farming, feudal dynasties, the feudal Communidades and
  Bhatkarshai. Then through democratic means we achieved Land to the
  Tiller but the political class who succeeded the architects of Goa
  made a mockery of the whole ‘socialist’ concept. And now it is being
  ridiculed further by reckless conversion of cultivable land into a
  saleable commodity. The land sharks from all over the world are simply
  looting Goa’s precious land in collusion with the businessminded
  politicians and spineless bureaucrats. This is the state of our
  Bhangarachem Goem (Golden Goa)! The Golden Goose? The whole journey of
  the Politics of Land could be defined in three simple phases:</p>
  <p>Land to the Tiller! Land to the Dealer!! Land to the Killer!!!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
  role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>“mundkar” means a person who, with
  the consent of the bhatkar or the person acting or purporting to act
  on behalf of the bhatkar lawfully resides with a fixed habitation in a
  dwelling house with or without obligation to render any services to
  the bhatkar and includes a member of his family but does not include—
  (i) a person paying rent to the bhatkar for the occupation of the
  house; (ii) a domestic servant or a chowkidar who is paid wages and
  who resides in an out-house, house-compound or other portion of his
  employer’s residence… (Definition in the Mundkar Act).<a
  href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>Naik Ravi; LAQ No 066 dated 28 July
  2021<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>Naik Ravi; LAQ No. 018A, ID 22555
  dated 27 January 2021<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Legislative Department,
  Ministry of Law &amp; Justice, Government of India<a href="#fnref4"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>Supreme Court of India: Union
  Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu &amp; Anr v/s Lakshmibai Narayan Patil
  etc etc, Judgement dated 23 July 1990<a href="#fnref5"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>Census of India 1991<a
  href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>10th Agri Census Report 2015-16<a
  href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>Economic Survey 2002<a
  href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>Colvalkar Dr Nagesh; Land Reforms
  in the State of Goa: An Assessment<a href="#fnref9"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Madhumati Atchut Parab vs Rajaram
  V Parab &amp; Ors, Supreme Court of India, 29 January 2009<a
  href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>Kamat Digambar, Assembly LAQ No
  045, 25 July 2018<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>Lourenco Reginald Aleixo, Assembly
  LAQ No 001, Id 2147, 1 August 2014<a href="#fnref12"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>Report No 3, Law Commission,
  Government of Goa,<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>Report No 25, August 2013, Law
  Commission, Government of Goa<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Assembly; A brief report of
  the Business transacted during 22 July - 21 August 2014<a
  href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>Times of India (Goa edition);
  24-28-31 October &amp; 8 December 2014<a href="#fnref16"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Goan; 3 August 2017<a
  href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>Directive by Bombay HC at Goa on
  16 January 2019 in PIL of GBA vs State of Goa<a href="#fnref18"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>Directive by Bombay HC at Goa on 7
  November 2019 in PIL of GBA vs State of Goa<a href="#fnref19"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn20" role="doc-endnote"><p>Assembly Question Id 21370 by
  Digambar Kamat on 5 February 2020<a href="#fnref20"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn21" role="doc-endnote"><p>Assembly Question Id 23150 by
  Vijai Sardesai on 29 January 2021<a href="#fnref21"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn22" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sonak Sangeeta M; Environment and
  Development: Goa at Crossroads, P 156<a href="#fnref22"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn23" role="doc-endnote"><p>Survey and Inquiry of CRZ Areas in
  Goa; By Remote Sensing Instruments, Hyderabad<a href="#fnref23"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn24" role="doc-endnote"><p>Survey and Inquiry of CRZ Areas in
  Goa; By Remote Sensing Instruments, Hyderabad<a href="#fnref24"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn25" role="doc-endnote"><p>Minutes of the State Executive
  Committee of Covid19, Government of Goa, held on 24 May 2020<a
  href="#fnref25" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn26" role="doc-endnote"><p>Coping with Covid-19: Survival and
  Revival of Goa’s Tourism Industry; A survey undertaken GTDC, Govt of
  Goa<a href="#fnref26" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn27" role="doc-endnote"><p>Coping with Covid-19: Survival and
  Revival of Goa’s Tourism Industry; A survey undertaken GTDC, Govt of
  Goa<a href="#fnref27" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
