<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: Laying the Ground for a Revolution</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-9">Chapter 9</h3>
  <h1 id="laying-the-ground-for-a-revolution">Laying the Ground for a
  Revolution</h1>
  <p>The process towards establishing democracy in Goa began with the
  military administration being replaced by Lt Governor T Sivasankar on
  8 June 1962, six months after liberation. The first step was to
  appoint two Members of Parliament from South Goa and North Goa on 20
  June − Dr Antonio Colaço and Dr Pundalik Gaitonde, respectively.<a
  href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Dr Gaitonde belonged to the Indian
  National Congress, a Goa branch of which was formally founded on 11
  June. Dr Colaço, an eminent medical practitioner and a landlord from
  Borda, Margao, represented the Goa Provincial Congress.</p>
  <p>Dr Colaço’s appointment to the Lok Sabha ignited the first spark of
  public protest in Free Goa. At a public felicitation function of both
  the MPs held in Mapusa on 6 July 1962, hundreds of people gathered
  outside the Mapusa Municipal building, shouting slogans against Dr
  Colaço and demanding elections for MPs. Lt Governor P Sivasankar, who
  was the chief guest, even had to face stone pelting at this public
  function.<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
  <p>This was followed by a fast-unto-death by a young freedom fighter,
  Roque Santana Fernandes, in the lobby of the Margao municipal building
  from 9 July. He ended it after five days only when he got a firm
  assurance to fix a meeting with PM Pandit Nehru in Bangalore to
  resolve this issue. His other freedom fighter colleagues assured him
  that they would go on a joint hunger strike if Nehru didn’t satisfy
  him. Fernandes did not pay heed even to the written assurance by AICC
  General Secretary K K Shah, during his Goa visit, that elections would
  be held. The fast was also supported by several freedom fighters who
  held public meetings at the venue.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
  <p>The prime contention of Roque Santana Fernandes was that Dr Colaço
  was an associate of the Portuguese regime and that he was one among
  those who were demanding autonomy for Goa within the Portuguese empire
  when Goans were giving their lives for total freedom and joining the
  Indian Union.<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> These appointments developed into
  the first political controversy, which probably laid the foundation of
  the historic Assembly election of 1963.</p>
  <p>The people at large were also upset over the manner in which Lt
  Governor T Sivasankar had set up a 24-member Consultative Council.
  Besides freedom fighters, trade union leaders, Shetkari Sanghatana
  activists and leaders of the political parties, the Lt Governor had
  also nominated on the Council Goa’s prominent landlords and mine
  owners like Vaicuntrao Dempo, Madhavrao Talaulikar as well as some
  doctors and professors who had always aligned with the Portuguese. Due
  to this the Council had to take mild stands on some land-related
  issues, which the people wanted Free Goa to resolve immediately. This
  accommodative approach created skepticism in the minds of the
  political activists.</p>
  <h2 id="making--breaking-of-the-congress">Making &amp; Breaking Of The
  Congress</h2>
  <p>It all evolved through the National Congress Goa (NCG), which had
  led Goa’s non-violent freedom struggle. Divergent views were
  prevailing in the NCG even during the freedom struggle, on the issue
  of Goa’s proposed merger into Maharashtra. A strong group within the
  NCG had laid down a two-point programme: 1) To free Goa from the
  Portuguese and make it a part of India; and 2) To merge Goa into
  Maharashtra. However, there was another group that did not want any
  confrontation on the issue of shaping up Goa, especially when mining
  was severely affected due to world recession, agriculture was in a bad
  shape, and building Goa socio-economically seemed a Herculean
  task.</p>
  <p>A group of the NCG espousing the cause of merger convened a
  convention in Mapusa on 22 May 1962, chaired by the eminent freedom
  fighter P P Shirodkar. The convention passed resolutions demanding
  Goa’s immediate merger into Maharashtra and to promote Marathi as the
  official language while calling Konkani a dialect of Marathi. This NCG
  group also supported pro-merger fronts organised in several parts of
  Goa like Mapusa, Kaisuv, Bicholim, Virnoda, Kavlem, Mardol, Quepem
  etc, in the New Conquests as well as in Bardez. They propagated their
  cause by holding meetings during the Marathi dramas performed at
  Zatras (Hindu temple festivals).<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref5" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  <p>Another NCG group met at the People’s High School in Panaji to
  decide whether the organisation should be retained or dissolved. It
  was attended by Peter Alvares, Gopal Apa Kamat, Pandurang Mulgaonkar,
  Shankar Sardesai, Dr Vinayak Mayekar, Anthony D’Souza and Prafull
  Priolkar among others. The meeting not only decided to retain the
  organisation but also formed a committee, which met Prime Minister
  Jawaharlal Nehru in Delhi and requested him to maintain the separate
  identity of Goa by promoting Konkani as well as Marathi languages.<a
  href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  <p>According to Purushottam Kakodkar, who later led the Congress for
  over a decade, he had decided to withdraw from politics as he felt
  alienated and left out by his own like-minded colleagues. The second
  NCG group did not even invite him for this meeting and also did not
  show him the memorandum to be submitted to the PM when his colleagues
  met him in Bombay. There was no question of the pro-merger group
  contacting him since he was one of the most vociferous leaders who
  opposed merger and supported Konkani as the language of Goa. However,
  he changed his mind when Adv Pandurang Mulgaokar, Adv Gopal Apa Kamat
  and Prof Shankar Sardesai persuaded him by meeting him twice in Margao
  requesting him to take the initiative of forming a branch of Indian
  National Congress in Goa. Accordingly, on 11 June 1962, an ad-hoc
  committee of the INC Goa was formed with Kakodkar and Dr Pundalik
  Gaitonde as its convenors.<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref7" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <p>Other members of the committee were leading freedom fighters too:
  Mulgaonkar, Kamat, Sardesai, Dr J F Martins, Dr Vinayak Mayekar, Dr
  Ram Hegde, Prof Laxmikant Bhembre, Anthony D’Souza, N B Rao, Alvaro
  Pereira, Dr Laura D’Souza and Mitra Madhav Bir.<a href="#fn8"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
  <p>These are the founders of the Congress party in Goa. It was a group
  of freedom fighters who had their differences of opinion on merging
  Goa into Maharashtra. Kakodkar himself was a strong proponent of
  maintaining a separate identity of Goa while Dr Gaitonde was
  supporting the merger. The committee members also had a mix of these
  opinions.</p>
  <p>They immediately formed an Agriculture Cell headed by Madhav Bir
  and Adv Mulgaonkar with the intention of taking ahead the cause of
  exploited peasants who were the tenants of Bhatkars and Communidades,
  as well as the issues of Kumeri cultivators etc. On the other hand,
  the Azad Gomantak Dal had been converted into the Goa Democratic Party
  and had organised a Shetkari Parishad in August 1962. Later on, the
  Congress leaders succeeded in pursuing the militant leaders like Adv
  Lawande etc to join the national party and fight unitedly for the
  cause of the downtrodden masses. This move also strengthened the force
  of mergerists within the Congress since most of the AGD members
  favoured merger.</p>
  <p>Differences within the Congress came to the fore when the first
  organisational election was held on 20 March 1963. Congress leader
  Radha Raman from Delhi was the returning officer. The battle lines
  were drawn, especially for the post of the President of Goa Pradesh
  Congress Committee (GPCC). Madhav Bir was the candidate proposed by
  the pro-merger leaders Adv Vishwanath Lawande and Tulshidas
  Malkarnekar. Shankar Sardesai and Ligorio Cota Carvalho proposed
  Kakodkar’s name. It was 20 versus 13. Kakodkar became Goa’s first
  elected president of a party, winning the election by seven votes. For
  the post of Treasurer, Vasco businessman Vasant Joshi (eight votes)
  lost the election to Apa Karmalkar (20 votes). Manju Gaonkar from
  Canacona was elected unopposed as the vice president.</p>
  <p>The other members elected as GPCC members were Shankar Sardesai,
  Ligorio Cota Carvalho, Gopal Apa Kamat, Anthony D’Souza and
  Chandrakant Kerkar. Dr Jose Francisco Martins, Sardesai and
  Malkarnekar were elected as members of AICC.</p>
  <p>But the battle was not limited to the contest between the two
  groups. Laura D’Souza, an eminent freedom fighter who was heading the
  National Congress Goa in 1955, sat down on a hunger strike in front of
  the Congress House, alleging malpractices in the elections. She had
  several complaints about the conducting of elections in Benaulim,
  Vasco, Tiswadi and Pernem, and that the Congressmen who had complained
  about the malpractices to the high command had been restrained from
  entering the election venue. The party had to then appoint a
  two-member inquiry committee consisting of R S Panchahazare and
  Ramdatta Dubey. After investigating, the Committee did admit some
  instances of irregularities, but termed it minor and refused to
  conduct elections afresh. After that, the Kakodkar Raj began in the
  Goa Congress.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> Laura D’Souza was then allotted a
  ticket to contest the MP election from South Goa.</p>
  <p>In a lengthy interview to <em>Gomantak</em>, Kakodkar denied all
  the allegations made against him including that he had received a
  cheque of Rs 25,000 from Kantilal Gosalia, a mine owner and that this
  money had been used to buy votes in his favour. He however admitted
  that he had received some donations from wealthy people of Goa and
  that the account books were open for scrutiny. He also claimed in this
  interview that Goa had many wealthy people, but hardly any person who
  could be ‘termed’ a Capitalist. What he meant by it was clear when
  candidates were chosen to contest the first Assembly election.</p>
  <h2 id="the-churning-of-thoughts">The Churning Of Thoughts</h2>
  <p>On the other hand, after some of the leading NCG and AGD members
  joined the Congress, the socialists including Peter Alvares, Shivaji
  Desai, Gajanan Raikar, etc. founded the Goa branch of the Praja
  Socialist Party. The Communist leaders and trade unionists decided to
  work under the guise of Frente Popular, in an attempt to try and
  attract the minorities who were against the Communists due to the
  influence of the Church.</p>
  <p>Waman Radhakrishna, a veteran journalist and freedom fighter, in
  his book on the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party, has aptly described
  the mindset of the common Goenkar at this juncture:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The Bahujan Samaj was happy with Goa’s freedom but was not
  trying to understand why it had remained backward. He was uneducated,
  but was not trying to find out the root cause behind their
  backwardness. Rather than being self-critical, he preferred to blame
  the community which had reached far ahead of him. To quite an extent,
  it was true. The high class people enjoyed all the privileges under
  the Portuguese regime… There were three sections of Goan society that
  were exploiting the Bahujan Samaj. The Bhatkar (landlords), the Savkar
  (moneylender) and the Empregado (bureaucrat). Sometimes all these
  three sections were found together in one family. There were also some
  educated people from the Bahujan Samaj who were into money lending or
  working as Empregado. These egoistic people were considering
  themselves to be the high class. From the point of view of the Bahujan
  Samaj, they had also become ‘Bamonn’ (Brahmins)... The Bahujan Samaj
  was scared that the same people would continue exploiting them using
  their power of education and influence.”</em><a href="#fn10"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Amidst these developments, two more socio-cultural organisations
  were in search of a political solution. One was the Gomantak Maratha
  Samaj (called Pragatik Maratha Samaj in those days), its members were
  educated, some of them had migrated to Bombay, and some had risen up
  locally in business and as professionals. They had a well-educated and
  sensible leadership. They were engaged in discussing how to end the
  exploitative system through democratic means in Free India. On the
  other hand was the Goa Hindu Association (GHA) of Bombay, which was
  largely dominated by educated and progressive-minded Saraswat Brahmins
  as well as members from the Gomantak Maratha Samaj and a few educated
  members from other communities. Around the time of Goa’s liberation,
  Maharashtra had also become a state through a prolonged struggle.
  Yeshwantrao Chavan had adopted the Bahujan formula to rule while
  enacting the Land to the Tiller Act. The agricultural sector had
  started progressing on co-operative lines in leaps and bounds in
  Maharashtra.</p>
  <p>As a result, some of the leaders from the GHA took the initiative
  and formed the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Mandal (MGM) in Bombay,
  echoing the demand of Goan Bahujan Samaj to merge Goa into Maharashtra
  and get a lifetime of freedom from the nexus of landlords,
  moneylenders, and bureaucrats.</p>
  <p>Most of them were strong proponents of Marathi. The Bombay based
  artists from the GHA were dominating the field of theatre, music,
  dance, films, literature, etc. in Maharashtra. Adv Sushil Kavalekar,
  one of the leading lawyers of Bombay and originally from Ponda, was
  elected the President of the MGM, Bombay.</p>
  <p>Shashikant Narvekar, a veteran journalist originally from Mapusa,
  as well as Ramdas Prabhugaonkar, an artist originally from Loliem,
  Canacona, were elected the general secretaries.<a href="#fn11"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a>
  84-year old Prabhugaonkar, who was the Secretary of the GHA for around
  25 years, told me an interesting anecdote in this regard. To celebrate
  the first anniversary of the MGM, Bombay, they went to invite P K
  Atre, popularly known as Pracharya Atre, one of the firebrand and
  fearless leaders of Samyukta Maharashtra movement, as the Chief Guest
  of the function. To their surprise, he flatly refused to accept the
  invitation, asking in his witty style why they wanted to merge Goa
  into Maharashtra when “you have nothing to eat and I have nothing to
  drink”. (Maharashtra government had imposed prohibition on liquor
  consumption at that time). Interestingly, Pracharya Atre’s periodical
  Maratha played a major role later during Goa’s Opinion Poll and Atre
  himself addressed public meetings in Goa, supporting the merger.</p>
  <p>While they were wondering whom to invite instead, Jagannath
  Sukhatankar, a writer and their member, assured them that he would try
  and get Dayanand Bandodkar, a businessman and social reformer from
  Goa. Accordingly Bhau Bandodkar graced the function. He liked the name
  of the organisation and commented: “<em>We are also trying to form a
  political party in Goa. This name would suit us well.</em>”</p>
  <h2 id="the-lion-in-the-making">The Lion In The Making</h2>
  <p>But the MGP of Goa was neither an extension of the Bombay MGM nor
  an initiative of Bandodkar. The wheels of the Assembly election had
  started moving with the Parliament passing the Union Territories Act
  1963 on 10 May. Union Home Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri had also
  announced that the first Assembly election for 30 seats including one
  each of Daman and Diu, as well as the two Parliamentary seats, would
  be held in the first week of December. The first democratically
  government would be installed on the second anniversary of Goa’s
  liberation − 19 December 1963.</p>
  <p>Just eight months before the elections, the MGP was formed in
  Goa.</p>
  <p>Different groups in Goa had been discussing the formation of a
  political alternative to the existing parties, especially the Congress
  and the Praja Samajwadi Party. As said earlier, the youth in different
  parts of Goa had constituted fronts to champion the cause of the
  merger into Maharashtra and to seek freedom from land-enslavement. The
  cause of the merger received a major boost with Vishwasrao Chowgule
  launching Goa’s first Marathi daily <em>Gomantak</em> on 24 March
  1962. He was a mine owner who came from Marathi-speaking Belgaum and
  set up his business in Goa during the Portuguese regime. B D Satoskar,
  the editor of <em>Gomantak</em> and a Marathi writer, was a strong
  proponent of the merger. Followed by this, Janardan Shinkre, another
  freedom fighter from Ponda, launched the second Marathi daily Pradeep
  on 6 September 1962<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a> as a Free Voice of the people of
  Goa, without any strings attached like the business interest of the
  Chowgules. The four-page daily was priced at five paise. Incidentally,
  both Satoskar and Shinkre were Saraswat Brahmins, but of a firm view
  that landlordism should come to an end and the tiller should be the
  owner of his own land.</p>
  <p>The person who took the initiative to bring all the promerger
  forces under one common banner was Janardan Shinkre. While running his
  pro-merger Front from Ponda, he realised that many people wanted to
  join the cause but had their reservations about the National Congress
  Goa. He discussed the matter with P P Shirodkar and both of them
  convened a meeting of all the like-minded leaders at Mardol on 6 March
  1963. Bandodkar was also invited to this meeting. PSP leader Shivaji
  Desai proposed that a forum on the lines of Samyukta Maharashtra
  Samiti be formed. But it was election time. The thought boiled down to
  the forming of a political organisation and contesting elections.<a
  href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> Bandodkar proposed the name
  Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Sanghatana, on the lines of the MGM in
  Bombay. It was agreed upon unanimously.</p>
  <p>Bandodkar was elected as the founder president of the MGS. By 7
  April 1963, the National Congress Goa group led by P P Shirodkar had
  formally merged into the MGM at a meeting held at Mardol. Eventually,
  the MGS was registered as the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) and
  the Election Commission of India allotted Lion as its symbol. This
  Lion roared in the hearts of the Bahujan Samaj of Goa and ruled
  uninterruptedly for the next 17 years.</p>
  <p>A little before the first meeting held to form the MGS, a secret
  meeting of non-Brahmin leaders was convened at the residence of
  Tukaram Lolayekar, a businessman in Madgao, which was also attended by
  Bandodkar as well as Narayan Karwarkar, the then president of Gomantak
  Maratha Samaj, Rajaram Painginkar and Bhalchandra Kankonkar. The
  proposal was to form a ‘Non-Brahmin Party’ on the lines of the Justice
  Party of Madras. However, Bandodkar vehemently opposed the idea of
  coming together based on a divisive agenda and creating an
  anti-Brahmin front that would divide the Goan society on caste lines.
  He strongly proposed that all the communities from the entire state
  should work together under one banner.<a href="#fn14"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14" role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a>
  “Where did you find this Bandodkar?” asked Raghunath Tople of Mapusa
  to Shinkre of Ponda the day the MGS was formed. Shinkre told him: “He
  carries lots of respect among the Bahujan Samaj.”[^15]</p>
  <p>People knew Bandodkar in those days as a young businessman and mine
  owner, who was generously donating funds for any good social cause,
  especially in the educational and cultural fields. But very few people
  knew what ideology he belonged to. Tarkateertha Lakshman Shastri Joshi
  has revealed this in an article he has written on a book published on
  Bhausaheb on the occasion of his 60th birthday:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“I met Bhausaheb Bandodkar in 1962. I was not aware that he
  knew me for the last 25 years. I was invited to Goa to inaugurate the
  Shetkari Parishad. I was put up at a bungalow on Altinho where I was
  welcomed by a smart-looking midage impressive personality called
  Dayanand Bandodkar, who was the mastermind behind the farmers’
  conference. He had assigned his daughter Shashikala to look after me.
  He told me that during his stay in Bombay in 1942, he had heard all my
  speeches. At that time, I was the official spokesman of the Radical
  Democratic Party, founded by Com M N Roy (based on his Marxist
  philosophy of Radical Humanism). Bhau was attending my study circles
  on international politics, Marxism etc, held at our Dadar office. He
  had even heard M N Roy, was impressed with his lectures and had become
  a Royist himself. However, he stayed away from joining the party when
  the internal differences in the party came to the fore.”</em><a
  href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>B D Satoskar, the first editor of <em>Gomantak</em>, says that Bhau
  gave credit to Lokmanya Tilak for his mission of Charity.<a
  href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> Sitaram Tengse, yet another
  senior journalist and former Editor of Rashtramat, says that many
  politicians in those days were inspired by Royist theory of Humanism,
  including Maharashtra’s first chief minister Y B Chavan, D B Karnik
  and especially veteran freedom fighter Com Shamrao Madkaikar in Goa,
  who was very close to Bhau. Being a Marxist himself during his student
  days, Tengse says Royism was much ahead of Communism, Royism respected
  human sentiments, freedom of thought and efficiency of human beings,
  irrespective of caste, creed or religion.<a href="#fn17"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a>
  According to Amrut Kansar, Bhau was equally influenced by the
  reformist movements of the 19th century in Maharashtra, led by Vithal
  Ramji Shinde, Mahatma Phule, Shahu Maharaj, Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar
  etc.<a href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a> The concept of ‘Bahujan’ had
  evolved through these influences which Chavan had implemented in
  Maharashtra and Bhau wanted it to be extended to Goa, by merging it
  into Maharashtra.</p>
  <p>This makes it crystal clear why Bhau opposed an anti-Brahmin party
  and refused to be part of any organisation that would divide the Goan
  society. For him, more than Marathi or Maharashtra, oppression of the
  downtrodden classes was the real issue and ending the exploitative
  system through democratic means was of paramount importance. However,
  he and the MGP represented the feelings of the farming community from
  the New Conquests. It was a different scenario altogether in the Old
  Conquests, except for some parts of Bardez.</p>
  <p>The MGP leadership did not realise that Marathi was an alien
  language for the Christian farmers as well as the landless labourers
  from the Old Conquests. Christians from the New Conquests were
  studying in the Marathi schools, but they were not even one-fifth of
  Goa’s total Christian population. The majority among the Christians
  lived in the Old Conquests and were not at all comfortable with the
  thought of merging their Goan identity into Maharashtra, calling
  themselves Marathi.</p>
  <p>The divide and rule policy of the Portuguese by suppressing the
  development of Konkani was bearing fruits in the first election
  itself.</p>
  <h2 id="morarji-versus-nehru">Morarji Versus Nehru</h2>
  <p>While mergerist forces were uniting under the banner of the MGP,
  union home minister Morarji Desai paid a two-day visit to Goa,
  confusing the whole issue further. At a crowded press conference held
  on 12 May 1963, he stated that all the union territories would be
  merged into the larger neighbouring states sooner or later. This
  directly contradicted the stand taken by Prime Minister Jawaharlal
  Nehru that the distinct identity of union territories like Goa or
  Pondicherry would be maintained for at least ten years, after which
  its future would be decided by the people of those respective
  territories, not by the central government.</p>
  <p>It was a ‘shocking’ press conference. He dismissed the possibility
  of restarting the lotteries, at the cost of revenue loss. At the cost
  of even further revenue loss, he said liquor prohibition would also be
  extended to Goa. He refused to accept the argument put forward by some
  journalists that social drinking was part of Goan culture. He was not
  sure that the territory’s economy would continue to be financially
  viable, while making it clear that all kinds of taxation measures
  would be extended to Goa shortly. And the final stroke in this
  comment: “<em>The prime minister has never said that Goa would remain
  separate if it succeeds in becoming self-sufficient.</em>”</p>
  <p>Within 10 days, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, the liberator of
  Goa, arrived on a three-day visit, from 22 to 24 May 1963. He was one
  man who had been consistently saying, even before liberation, that
  India would maintain Goa’s distinct identity. The issue of merger had
  been hounding Goa since 1940, and Nehru was the sole Congress leader
  who had countered all kinds of pressures from his party colleagues,
  especially from Maharashtra and to some extent from Karnataka, to
  merge the territory which was half the size of any district of the
  neighbouring states. But the Prime Minister had not left a single
  opportunity to display his firmness. While addressing a rally of Goans
  in Bombay on 4 June 1956, Nehru had said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“What have we done in the French settlements? First of all, we
  have maintained their identity. We could easily or we can easily, in
  future, absorb them into the state of Madras or some district of
  Madras State. We do not propose to do that, because we want to
  maintain the individuality of Pondicherry and Karaikal. We want to
  maintain the type of French culture that has developed here, the
  French language that has developed there and they have complete
  freedom to continue their own laws, their educational apparatus and
  everything… So, here is an example for you which obviously would be
  applied by us to Goa when the time comes. I am saying this because
  some people are misled, either by false propaganda or by
  overenthusiastic people in India who say that Goa would be attached to
  Maharashtra or Karnataka Province… I hope you will be very friendly
  and cooperative neighbours.”</em>[^20]</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>[^20] Kelekar Ravindra; (Editor) Nation’s Solemn Commitments on Goa
  1963</p>
  <p>Nehru said this repeatedly in Bombay and also in the Parliament
  before liberating Goa and even after finally making Goa a part of the
  Indian Union through Operation Vijay, the military action. Perhaps
  this was the reason he was greeted with a grand welcome everywhere,
  from the time he landed in Goa on 22 May 1963 at 11.55 am at Dabolim
  till he flew back from Vasco by helicopter on 24 May. During his
  threeday tour from Dabolim to Panaji, Margao, Mapusa, Calangute,
  Bicholim, Old Goa, Mangeshi, Ponda, and Vasco, no less than one and a
  half lakh Goans had either gathered to listen to him or greet him
  while his motorcade was passing through. Apart from the public
  rallies, he had three special get-togethers with children in Panaji,
  Calangute, and Bicholim, a meeting with newly elected panchas in
  Margao, and a special convention of farmers in Ponda. On the first day
  itself, on the way to Panaji from the airport, he had to face the
  first unscheduled stop at Sancoale, where the locals disregarded
  police arrangements and garlanded him. He was greeted at the airport
  by a crowd of over 10,000 and on the last day, when he had planned to
  meet citizens of Vasco after visiting the Mormugao port and the naval
  base, the small scheduled meeting had to be shifted to Tilak Maidan to
  control the crowd of thousands, including women holding their babies
  in their arms.<a href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
  <p>Nehru did not disappoint anybody. He kept the hopes of mergerists
  alive by telling them at each and every rally as well as the press
  conferences that after a decade Goans would be given an opportunity to
  decide whether they wanted a merger or not. On the first day itself,
  at a rally at Bandodkar Maidan in Panaji, Nehru allayed the fears
  created by Morarji Desai a week before.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“There should be no hankering for Goa’s merger with this state
  or that. Goa should develop as it likes in the framework of India,
  particularly because Goa was potentially a rich place and it had all
  the makings of being a self-supporting state. If the Goans themselves
  brought about economic developments and raised the living standards,
  there was no reason why it should not function as a separate unit of
  federal India.”</em><a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref20"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Goa and Goans proved this visionary right. Since 1987 Goa has
  thrived as a self-sufficient State with the highest per capita income,
  highest standard of living, and also topping several parameters like
  the health index and more.</p>
  <p>At the press conference, he also clarified on certain issues on
  which Morarji had created panic. No liquor prohibition would be
  enforced in Goa in the foreseeable future, he clarified. He also
  assured that his government did not want to impose on the Goans
  anything they themselves did not desire.<a href="#fn21"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref21" role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a>
  Here are some more statements Nehru made either at the public rallies
  or the press conferences:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Purely on merits, I think it (Goa) should be kept separate.
  Apart from merits, because a considerable number of people here − it
  is immaterial whether they are a majority or minority − a considerable
  number here are afraid of being submerged by another individuality, if
  I may say so.</em></p>
  <p><em>It is quite absurd to put Konkani against Marathi or Marathi
  against Konkani. This kind of linguistic approach of suppressing a
  language is bad. Therefore, I think that while all the languages
  should flourish here, particular attention should be paid to Konkani,
  which is the common people’s language.</em></p>
  <p><em>India is like a beautiful carpet, the textures of which bring
  out beautiful differences. But it is one carpet, and one whole, that
  is the beauty. So we must continue to go on weaving it by our
  activities, thoughts and by our actions. But always remember the unity
  of it, the unity of design of it, and yet l maintain the beauty of
  individual parts of it.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <h2 id="the-media-blackout">The Media Blackout</h2>
  <p>Nehru had tried to awaken the Goan masses, but perhaps the Goan
  media had a different agenda. Goa had four newspapers, including two
  Portuguese dailies carried forward post-liberation, <em>O Heraldo</em>
  and <em>A Vida</em>, besides <em>Gomantak</em>, the Marathi daily. A
  year later, on 18 February 1963, <em>The Navhind Times</em> was
  started by Dempo Group, Goa’s leading mine owner and a prominent
  landlord. These two latest newspapers had a significant mass reach
  among the newly educated Goans, who could read English and/or Marathi.
  Both the newspapers very skilfully blacked out Nehru on one important
  aspect he spoke repeatedly at all his public rallies − his dream of
  Land to the Tiller.</p>
  <p>On the day he arrived in Goa, at a rally held at the Bandodkar
  ground in Panaji, attended by around 30,000 people, he said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Apart from that the Portuguese here and if I may say so to
  some extent in their own country have developed a society which is
  completely out of date in the modern world. I am prepared to admit
  that our society in India is also out of date in a different sense,
  and we have to change it; but this change in ending of the Portuguese
  domination here necessarily resulted in changing many things. The
  changes are going on. And when a change happens in the social fabric,
  it has an upsetting feature. It may ultimately be good; it may even
  immediately be good for many; but for some, it is upsetting. And I can
  well understand that.</em></p>
  <p><em>Now we do not want this change or any change to occur which
  causes harm or injury to the people, but sometimes it cannot be
  helped. Suppose, as in India, one of our major reforms has been
  putting an end to the big landlord system, the big zamindari system,
  because we thought it was bad for the peasantry and for the people
  generally to have this big landlord system. That is the common
  thinking all over the world today. But in removing the zamindari
  system, the poor zamindars suffered. We gave them compensation and
  they said it was not enough. They suffered.</em></p>
  <p><em>When there is social change, it has to be faced. One tries to
  minimise the inconvenience of the suffering, but for the larger social
  good, it has to be faced. Anyhow, it was inevitable that some changes
  should take place here, should upset your normal way of living. We did
  not want it to happen, we try to avoid that. We have to minimise it,
  but the fact is there and we want to work well, we want rather to
  leave it to you to work and according to your wishes so as to proceed
  to have this change over quietly and as far as possible for the
  benefit of the larger number of this."</em><a href="#fn22"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref22"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>22</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Nehru was clear in his thoughts about abolishing the ‘outdated’
  feudal system, which we called Bhatkarshai in Goa. He was also blunt
  enough to state that he could not help if it upset the existing system
  in Goa. The next day, at a much bigger rally of around 30,000 in
  Margao, he explained why abolishing the feudal system of Zamindari was
  the need of the hour if we ha to progress and compete with other
  developed countries:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>"So we want to create a society in India which gives
  opportunity to everyone and which lessens greatly the differences that
  exist between the people, rich and poor: That is a difficult job, but
  it is a possible job and we are going to achieve it. It was not
  possible perhaps in the old days, but science has made progress, and
  science and technology have made it possible for us by our own labour
  to produce enough for everybody. That will take some time.</em></p>
  <p><em>You know how rich America is, how rich England and Germany and
  Japan are, and Russia? What is there in common between a capitalist
  country like America and Communist country like Russia? A common
  factor is that both depend on science and technology and both have
  made progress. Their Gods are science and technology. They may have
  different religions but the real Gods they worship are science and
  technology. And there is no capitalism in science and no communism in
  physics and chemistry and other things. It is just knowledge as
  such.</em></p>
  <p><em>And it is by that knowledge that they have progressed and it is
  by that knowledge that we shall progress. Science and the children of
  science, technology etc, that will tell us how to increase the wealth
  that we produce from the land, from industry, and that is the only
  way. We cannot produce wealth except by hard work and by understanding
  modern methods of working on land and for industry. It is not a thing
  by going to an astrologer that you get rich, or by other methods like
  that; it is hard work.</em></p>
  <p><em>So, we adopted, soon after freedom came to us we adopted this
  major method, this major approach, which we call the planning
  approach, thinking out what we should do. One of the first things we
  did was to put an end to the large landlords in India because they
  came in the way of the country’s progress. A bad agrarian system
  prevents a country from progressing, and that is the first thing that
  has to be removed. In Europe it was removed by bloody wars. In Japan
  it was removed after the last great war. Everywhere this is the first
  thing. So we had decided, even before independence, to remove it and
  we removed it and we have very largely succeeded. We want peasant
  proprietors on the land and you will remember that in our country 80
  percent of the people live in the villages. And our country will
  really only progress when the 80 percent progress. It is not the
  cities, big cities like Bombay and Calcutta and Delhi or Madras, that
  make a difference, but the villages that must progress. And therefore,
  we have to think of this general progress of the country- villages and
  towns and the like."</em><a href="#fn23" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref23" role="doc-noteref"><sup>23</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Goa, at that time, was also 80 per cent rural. It was getting
  educated. It was struggling. It was looking for an alternative economy
  that would stop out-migrations of Goans for better prospects and
  develop the existing geographical structure of Goa. Nehru had laid
  down the plan before the people. And then when he went to Ponda the
  same day to address Goa’s farmers, he even told them how to achieve
  this goal:</p>
  <p><em>"In the olden days, we had a feudal system in India and all the
  land was owned by zamindars, taluqdars, jagirdars and princes. The
  rest of the people worked for them which was not right. That system
  has been abolished. Now we want that the tillers of the soil should
  own the land too. [Applause] It is gradually happening. It has already
  come to pass to a very large extent. But it is not enough to have
  abolished feudalism. We must increase production from land. We have to
  adopt the right methods.</em></p>
  <p><em>First of all, as I said, education of children is extremely
  important… We have adopted the Panchayati Raj system to strengthen the
  development programme… So now you will find that you do not have to
  belong to a wealthy family or a high caste to attain some position.
  Those who work hard and serve the country will be chosen for their
  ability. No one will occupy high positions because of his birth or
  connection… We want that the people of Goa should take the reins of
  government into their own hands as it is being done in the rest of the
  country… You will elect representatives to the Lok Sabha in Delhi who
  will participate in the law-making processes for the entire country.
  Secondly, you will have your own legislature in Goa to which the
  people will elect their representatives."</em><a href="#fn24"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref24"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>24</sup></a></p>
  <p>It was a clear-cut election agenda he set for the people of Goa.
  Abolish the feudal system of <em>Bhatkarshai</em>, let the tillers own
  their land, educate their children, and learn modern technology. To
  achieve this, elect your own representatives through elections and
  start ruling Goa for the haves and the have-nots. Did the Congress
  party adopt Nehru’s strategy to achieve this goal? We will deal with
  this question in the next chapter on how the candidates were chosen
  and what was the result of it.</p>
  <h2 id="landlords-rally-around-the-ugp">Landlords Rally Around The
  UGP</h2>
  <p>The core component of Nehru’s speeches did not go public through
  the media, except for one day in <em>Gomantak</em>. But not less than
  one and a half lakh people had heard him. It was discussed in the
  towns and the villages, at the markets, tinttos, tea shops, taverns
  and practically everywhere since the first election was at the
  doorstep. While the farming community and the common Goan were in a
  cheerful mood, the landlord community, across the religious lines, was
  quite upset. If they didn’t pull up their sleeves, it could be the end
  of their age-old hegemony and feudal rule.</p>
  <p>On the other hand, the Christian community was getting restless
  over the growing mood of merging Goa into Maharashtra. Though migrant
  Christians were familiar with Marathi in Bombay, they were not
  well-conversant with it. It was an alien language for Christians
  living in Goa. Secondly, in a four-crore strong Maharashtra,
  Christians were hardly six lakhs. Even if Goa had merged into
  Maharashtra, it would be a drop in the ocean, with the Christian
  population not able to cross two per cent. In Bombay, they had
  experienced it while facing the domination of Gujaratis and
  Marathis.</p>
  <p>As the elections approached, a tug of war began within the Congress
  over allotment of tickets to some landlords, and the pro-merger lobby
  started pressuring the party leadership. This uncertainty perhaps
  created panic among the landlord class and they decided to align with
  the Christian community, who were trying to mobilise the
  anti-mergerist forces as a political alternative. In a shrewd manner
  that is typical of the upper class Brahmins, the landlords across all
  the religions decided to override the sentiments of the minority
  community and pose a challenge to the movement of land reforms that
  Nehru had spelt out in clear terms.</p>
  <p>Hardly three months ahead of the Assembly and Lok Sabha elections
  scheduled in the first week of December, on 13 September 1963, a
  formal announcement was made of a new regional party. Five political
  groups functioning in the Old Conquests came together under one common
  banner − the United Goans Party (UGP). Most of the leaders either
  belonged to Christian Brahmins (<em>Bamonn</em>) and Kshatriyas
  (<em>Chardo</em>), owning land and/or were doctors, professors, or
  lawyers earlier aligned with the erstwhile Portuguese rulers. The
  Hindu Brahmins from Margao, the stronghold of Saraswat Brahmins, also
  joined hands with them. John de Souza was the sole freedom fighter
  among them.</p>
  <p>The oldest and biggest organisation among the five was Partido
  Indiano, led by Dr Alvaro de Loyola Furtado, which had earlier
  contested the ‘high-class’ Parliamentary elections during the
  Portuguese regime. The party was founded by Alvaro’s
  Portuguese-speaking grandfather. Dr Loyola Furtado was a prominent
  Saxttikar Bhakar and equally respected doctor from Chinchinim. During
  the Portuguese regime, he was known for his liberal views.</p>
  <p>*<em>A India Portuguesa</em> was Goa’s first weekly in Portuguese
  started in 1850 and was changed to A India after liberation. It was
  the mouthpiece of Partido Indiano. After coming to power, in 1964, the
  MGP government had imposed press censorship on its publication,
  alleging that it favoured the Portuguese. It was later shut down. At
  that time, however, it was run by Loyola Furtado’s daughter Leonor
  Loyola Furtado e Fernandes.</p>
  <p>Dotor Loyola Furtado, as he was popularly known in Saxtti, was
  chosen as the founder president of the UGP.</p>
  <p>Dr Jack de Sequeira, a 48-year old doctor and a landlord from
  Panaji, had founded Goencho Pokx, during the same period. He was known
  for his liberal views and courageous attitude.</p>
  <p>The Goa National Union led by J M de Souza was pursuing with the
  central government an entirely new democratic setup for Goa. He had
  proposed a legislative council of 48 members, four each elected from
  12 talukas (conselhos in Portuguese regime) and a cabinet of 12, one
  each from a conselho, administered by the Centre. He had even met
  Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on 10 January 1962 in this regard.</p>
  <p>Besides this, there were also two other small groups, the United
  Front of Goans led by Meilicio Fernandes and Democratic Party by Dr
  Joao da Costa Pereira.<a href="#fn25" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref25" role="doc-noteref"><sup>25</sup></a></p>
  <p>Within three days, on 16 September the Sunday, the UGP had its
  first public meeting at Saligao in Bardez. It was attended by around
  500 people. Besides these five leaders, it was also addressed by Lima
  Leitao, the Vasco-based lady mine owner and landowner; Sadashiv Desai,
  a Bhatkar from Pernem as well as Jagdish Rao. Their prime attack was
  on the Congress, blaming the party for Goans going through hardships
  since liberation due to restrictions imposed on mining, banning of the
  lottery, and curtailing imports. The speakers also cautioned the
  people of the next probable step to prohibit consumption of
  liquor.</p>
  <p>Incidentally, on the same day, the Congress President Purushottam
  Kakodkar, Ligorio Cota Carvalho and Tulshidas Malkarnekar, in a
  meeting organised by the Margao block, carried out a scathing attack
  on the UGP. Calling it a communal party, they alleged that the leaders
  had their selfish motives and had no interest in protecting the
  interest of their community.<a href="#fn26" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref26" role="doc-noteref"><sup>26</sup></a> In its meetings, the
  Congress leaders also made fun of the Land to the Tiller demand made
  by the UGP leaders. Since most of their leaders were wealthy Bhatkars,
  the Congress leaders publicly asked if they agreed with the demand and
  whether they would now personally hold the plough in their hands and
  get into the field physically.<a href="#fn27" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref27" role="doc-noteref"><sup>27</sup></a></p>
  <p>The UGP manifesto had land reforms and Tenancy Act as one of the
  prime points, though in public meetings they mainly harped upon their
  demands like Statehood for Goa and opposing merger of Goa into
  Maharashtra.</p>
  <p>Clear cut battle lines were thus drawn in Goa’s first historic
  election where three major parties were crossing swords, the Congress,
  the UGP, and the MGP. The battleground was The Land!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
  role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Annual Report of the Ministry for
  External Affairs 1962-63<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 7 जुलै 1962<a
  href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 9-14 जुलै 1962<a
  href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 10 जुलै 1962<a
  href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; महाराष्ट्रवादी
  गोमंतक पक्षः स्थापना आणि वाटचाल पान 18<a href="#fnref5"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा
  पान 11<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>नागवेंकार डॉ हरिश्चंद्र ;
  पुरुषोत्तम काकोडकार, जिवीत आनी कार्य, पान 72<a href="#fnref7"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा
  पान 17<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>Parobo Parag D; India’s First
  Democratic Revolution P 117<a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; महाराष्ट्रवादी
  गोमंतक पक्षः स्थापना आणि वाटचाल पान 13, 15<a href="#fnref10"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>Interview with Ramdas
  Prabhugaonkar<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>प्रभू परेश वासुदेव; गोमंतकीय मराठी
  पत्रकारितेचा इतिहास, पान 213, 216<a href="#fnref12"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; महाराष्ट्रवादी
  गोमंतक पक्षः स्थापना आणि वाटचाल, पान 20<a href="#fnref13"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>कारवारकर उर्फ मराठे नारायण आ;
  आमच्या समाजाचे स्फूर्तीस्थान (आमचे भाऊ,<a href="#fnref14"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>जोशी लक्ष्मणशास्त्री; अनेक तेजस्वी
  पैलू असलेले व्यक्तिमत्व (आमचे भाऊ, ना. भाऊसाहेब बांदोडकर
  षष्ठ्यद्विपूर्ती<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>सातोस्कर बा. द.; समाजसेवक बांदोडकर
  (आमचे भाऊ, ना. भाऊसाहेब बांदोडकर षष्ठ्यद्विपूर्ती गौरव ग्रंथ) पान
  91)<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>टेंगसे सीताराम; एक असामान्य
  लोकनेता (भाऊसाहेब गौरव ग्रंथ 2011) पान 23-24<a href="#fnref17"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>कांसार अमृत; अभिवादन समाजपुरुषाला
  (भाऊसाहेब गौरव ग्रंथ 2011) पान 14<a href="#fnref18"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 23 to 25 May
  1963<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn20" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; Nehru Conquers
  Heart of Goa, 23 May 1963<a href="#fnref20" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn21" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Hindu; 26 May 1963<a
  href="#fnref21" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn22" role="doc-endnote"><p>Selected Works of Jawaharlal
  Nehru; Series 2/Vol. 82/May 1963-July 1963 Pg 162<a href="#fnref22"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn23" role="doc-endnote"><p>Selected Works of Jawaharlal
  Nehru; Series 2/Vol. 82/May 1963- - July 1963 Pg 183<a href="#fnref23"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn24" role="doc-endnote"><p>Selected Works of Jawaharlal
  Nehru; Series 2/Vol. 82/May 1963- - July 1963 Pg 191-92<a
  href="#fnref24" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn25" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 14 September
  1963<a href="#fnref25" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn26" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 17 September
  1963<a href="#fnref26" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn27" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 14 ऑक्टोबर 1963<a
  href="#fnref27" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
