<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: The 'State' of Migrants</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-6">Chapter 6</h3>
  <h1 id="the-state-of-migrants">The 'State' of Migrants</h1>
  <p>Unlike the rest of India, Goa is a state formed by four kinds of
  major migrations. Two among them are similar to the rest of India
  while the other two are unique. To analyse local politics, knowing the
  history of migrations is of utmost importance. We have already
  analysed two migrations that took place in Goa. One, from the early
  settlers to the settlements followed by the different dynasties and
  the role they played in shaping up Goa’s polity. The second one is
  unique to Goa, caused by Portuguese colonialism and the religious
  conversions of Hindus and Muslims as well as the horrific Inquisition
  inflicted upon the converted Goan Christians. This saga resulted in a
  series of migrations, first by the Hindus in the 16th and 17th
  centuries and then by the neoconverts, especially in the 17th
  century.</p>
  <p>Then came a major spate of migration of Goans, which gained
  momentum from the 19th century. The decaying economic situation in
  Goa, in the Estado da India, and the opportunities thrown up all over
  the world led to the migration of many aspiring people from the
  Christian community of Goa. This migration still continues. In the
  last three decades Goa’s educated Hindu population has also been
  migrating in a big way, due to lack of opportunities in their home
  State.</p>
  <p>On the other hand, Goa has also been witnessing inward migration
  from all over India after liberation in 1961. One, largely by the
  labour class and lower middle class, to seize the employment and
  professional opportunities which the locals shy away from. And the
  second migration is by the ‘cream’ of India’s elite society, which is
  buying land at throwaway prices and settling down in Goa. Having a
  holiday home in Goa has become a big craze among the wealthy class of
  India and also among the foreigners.</p>
  <p>To understand Goa’s politics, it is necessary to travel down
  history and perceive the mindset of Goan voters, who consist of those
  who had migrated to Goa centuries ago, the new migrant population of
  this century, as well as the Goans who out-migrate to work but remain
  strongly connected with the concerns and welfare of their
  motherland.</p>
  <h2 id="more-christians-than-hindus-left-goa">More Christians Than
  Hindus Left Goa?</h2>
  <p>We know that Goa was historically divided into two Goas − the
  Velhas Conquistas (Old Conquests) and Nova Conquistas (New Conquests).
  By 1788, when the eight talukas of the latter were annexed to Goa, the
  Portuguese had changed their policy on religious conversions. They had
  agreed to respect the traditions and customs of their population. The
  Inquisition, though finally abolished in 1812, had lost its teeth when
  it was suspended in 1774 and revived four years later.</p>
  <p>The Christians found in the New Conquests today are the migrants
  from the Old Conquests, they are not local converts.<a href="#fn1"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
  Having been ill-treated by the Portuguese regime as inferior citizens,
  especially those from the Sudir caste, they shifted to the New
  Conquests as landless agricultural labourers, toddy tappers, and
  fishermen. They could buy their own land and build houses only when
  they started working overseas on hard labour jobs as seamen, as well
  as in the Gulf, and now in the UK.</p>
  <p>But it is not true that Christians were always a minority in Goa.
  Even after the New Conquests were annexed to Estado da India, the
  Christians were the majority. The official figures of the Portuguese
  Census indicate that way back in 1850, Christians comprised 64 per
  cent of Goa’s population. Out of a total of 3.64 lakh population,
  Christians were 2.32 lakh and Hindus 1.29 lakh; a difference of over
  one lakh. But by the end of the century, the situation had changed
  drastically. It had come down to 50:50. The major proportionate drop
  was in the first three decades, till 1881. The Christian population
  did rise, but by only 10,000 (2.41 lakh). The Hindu population on the
  other hand rose by one lakh (2.30 lakh). And by 1910, Hindus (2.70
  lakh) were equal to the Christian (2.68 lakh) population.
  Subsequently, not only in terms of percentage, but even in terms of
  number, the Christian population kept on declining till Goa was
  liberated in 1961. From 1850 to 1960, the whole picture had reversed.
  Hindus (3.54 lakh) were one lakh more than the Christians (2.25
  lakh).</p>
  <p>Note : Other religions like Buddhists etc are included in the
  category of Muslims Source : Portuguese Census of Estado da India, An
  Historical and Archaeological Sketch of City of Goa &amp; Census of
  India</p>
  <p>Was it a state-wide transition? It was, but to a large extent in
  the Old Conquests. Let’s analyse the following graph, which shows the
  percentage of religions in 1848, 1961 and 2011.</p>
  <p>In the Old Conquests, the Christian population has declined
  substantially, from 88 per cent to 35 per cent. Comparatively, it has
  declined marginally from 15 to 11 per cent in the New Conquests over
  one and a half centuries. In contrast, the decline and rise of Hindus
  in the Old and New Conquests appears quite reasonable up to 1961.</p>
  <p>A further break-up of the population in the talukas of both the
  conquests clearly indicates that the major decline in the Christian
  population happened in the Bardez taluka. There was a huge drop by 60
  per cent in 163 years, till 2011. The Christian population in Tiswadi
  dropped to half (50 per cent), followed by Salcete, where Christians
  reduced by 40 per cent. No talukawise break-up of 1848 is available
  for the New Conquests. But the Christian population also dropped there
  by 31 per cent from Liberation to 2011.</p>
  <p>Population numbers always keep increasing in society even if family
  planning is practiced vigorously. However, the percentage either drops
  or rises due to two reasons. Here in this case it was outward
  migration (emigration) of Christians from Goa and inward migration of
  Hindus from outside Goa. Obviously, there was no reason for the Hindus
  to migrate to Goa till it was liberated. But the prime reason for the
  decline of Christian population appears to be emigration.</p>
  <p>POPULATION SHIFT TALUKA-WISE: 1848-2011</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>TALUKA</th>
  <th>HINDU</th>
  <th></th>
  <th></th>
  <th>CHRISTIAN</th>
  <th></th>
  <th></th>
  <th>MUSLIM</th>
  <th></th>
  <th></th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>1848</td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2011</td>
  <td>1848</td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2011</td>
  <td>1848</td>
  <td>1961</td>
  <td>2011</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bardez</td>
  <td>14</td>
  <td>58</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>86</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>26</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tiswadi</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>52</td>
  <td>62</td>
  <td>78</td>
  <td>46</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>0.2</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>41</td>
  <td>65</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>53</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>13</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Salcete</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>35</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>75</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>0.1</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>OLD CONQUESTS</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>42</td>
  <td>55</td>
  <td>88</td>
  <td>56</td>
  <td>35</td>
  <td>0.1</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Pernem</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>89</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>10</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>0.41</td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>92</td>
  <td>91</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Sattari</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>93</td>
  <td>91</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>89</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>10</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>61</td>
  <td>64</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>38</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>74</td>
  <td>79</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td>14</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>80</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>0.48</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>NEW CONQUESTS</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>36</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>66</td>
  <td>64</td>
  <td>38</td>
  <td>25</td>
  <td>0.4</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Portuguese Census of Estado da India, An Historical and
  Archaeological Sketch of City of Goa &amp; Census of India</em></p>
  <p>It means that not only did the Hindus migrate to settle outside Goa
  during the Portuguese regime but the Christians did so too. It began
  during the Inquisition, perhaps in large numbers in the 17th century,
  when the neo-converts could not bear the forceful de-culturalisation
  and migrated to the Konkan belt in Maharashtra and Belgaum as well as
  to North Canara in Karnataka.</p>
  <p>The second major emigration is recorded at the end of the 17th
  century, when Chatrapati Sambhaji of the Maratha empire had almost
  captured Goa in 1683 and the Portuguese Governor had actually pleaded
  for divine intervention by placing his sceptre on the relics of St
  Francis Xavier at Old Goa.</p>
  <p>Goa’s history would have been different if the Mughals had not
  invaded the Maratha territories at that point of time, due to which
  Sambhaji had to retreat from Goa. However, after this episode, by the
  beginning of the 18th century, native Christians had started migrating
  to Karnataka. Almost 40,000 Christians are reported to have been
  settled across the Portuguese borders, returning annually only to
  collect their zonn (dividend) from their respective Communidades.<a
  href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
  <p>Goans began working for the British when the naval fleet of the
  British Indian government was stationed in Goa between 1797 and 1813,
  in anticipation of an attack by the French (which never took place).
  They employed Goan Christians due to their familiarity with Western
  culture. When the British fleet withdrew from Goa and established
  stations in Bombay, Karachi, Madras, Calcutta and Singapore their Goan
  staff followed them. Later, after the War of Independence in 1857, the
  British began setting up a vast railway network for the quick movement
  of troops, including in Goa. The Goans poured out and got jobs in the
  railway-related works and subsequently settled in large numbers in
  Hubli, Belgaum, Mumbai, and Pune.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
  <p>Then occurred a major exodus, largely of Christians, when the
  Anglo-Portuguese Treaty was signed in 1878 and Goa became the prime
  supplier of labour to British India. Official figures from Portuguese
  records show that 3.23 lakh Goans had left Estado da India (Portuguese
  Goa) and settled in Bombay as the citizens of British India, in just
  30 years, from 1880 to 1910. Ninety-two per cent among them were from
  the Old Conquests. Obviously, the majority of them were Christians.
  Besides Bombay, some of them also settled in Madras and Bengal.<a
  href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Goa’s rural scene became increasingly more desolate. When the
  first Goan Provincial Congress met in 1951, one participant presented
  statistics of unemployment: 5000 jobless, 1500 beggars, 1,50,000 idle
  bodies…the Second Provincial Congress in 1971 paid more attention to
  the problems of emigration; it concluded that the horrendous exodus
  was a pathological phenomenon for which the Portuguese colonial
  administration ought to accept responsibility. Those who stayed behind
  could find relief in the ever-growing number of taverns. The Seventh
  Provincial Congress in 1927 regretted the government’s manifest lack
  of concern in controlling this vice. Obviously, the licensing of more
  taverns brought more income to a revenue-starved
  administration.”</em><a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>There have been two separate studies conducted to estimate the
  exodus of Goans during this period till 1910, when the Portuguese
  monarchy was replaced by the Republic. The first one was conducted by
  two researchers from Portugal and the Netherlands: Paulo Teodoro de
  Matos of the Instituto Universitário de Lisboa in Lisboa and Jan
  Lucassen of the International Institute of Social History in
  Amsterdam. Of the total number of 37,345 passports granted between
  1847 and 1855 by Estado da India from Goa, they selected 2,042
  passports, corresponding to a sample of 5.5% (constant for each
  year).</p>
  <p>They found that almost all the applicants (96%) went to Bombay.
  Most of the migrants were from the Old Conquests, largely from Bardez
  (67%), and nearly 90 per cent of them were Christians. Only 6
  Christians from 1787 (a sample) were from the New Conquests. The rest
  of the 55 were Hindus from the New Conquests. Comparatively, hardly
  seven per cent of Hindus migrated from the Old Conquests.</p>
  <p>Passengers’ Religion Taluka-Wise (5% Sample) 1847-1855</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>RELIGION</th>
  <th>BARDEZ</th>
  <th>TISWADI</th>
  <th>SALCETE</th>
  <th>OLD CONQUEST</th>
  <th>NEW CONQUEST</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Christians</td>
  <td>1141</td>
  <td>116</td>
  <td>337</td>
  <td>1594</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>1600</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Hindus</td>
  <td>47</td>
  <td>69</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>124</td>
  <td>55</td>
  <td>179</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Muslims</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>No Info</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Total</td>
  <td>1190</td>
  <td>191</td>
  <td>345</td>
  <td>1726</td>
  <td>61</td>
  <td>1787</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Goa at work around 1850…. By Paulo Teodoro de Matos
  &amp; Jon Lucassen</em></p>
  <p>The second study recorded by Dr Remy Dias shows the real magnitude
  of the exodus over three decades, from 1880 to 1910. Over 3.23 lakh
  Goans left Goa, mainly to Bombay, and a few of them went to Madras and
  Bengal, up to Karachi (today in Pakistan due to which they have lost
  their ancestral land in Goa, as India considers it ‘Enemy
  Property’!).</p>
  <p>It was the Old Conquests (92%) once again with Bardezkars (48%)
  topping the list, which was almost half of the total number of
  emigrants. The volume of annual migration doubled in the second half
  of the period. Saxttikars were next in numbers and there were around
  25,000 from Tiswadi. Equivalent to the onetime Island of Goa were the
  Goans from the whole of the New Conquests. On an average, 4000 Goans
  left the state for good every year.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Goans who migrated during this period to British India were
  both Hindus and Christians. Women migrated independently to British
  India. They were mostly unmarried women or widows from lower classes.
  Among independent female migrants were ‘bailadeiras’ (dancing girls).
  Large number of women who migrated worked as domestic staff at the
  homes of Parsi and British families, while others worked as nurses and
  secretaries. Men generally migrated to the rest of India without their
  families. They were engaged in skilled and unskilled manual jobs. A
  small number took up white-collar jobs or worked as musicians. Some
  proceeded to Bombay for further studies in medicine and other
  fields.”</em><a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Emigration Of Goans To British India: 1880-1910</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>YEAR</th>
  <th>TISWADI</th>
  <th>SALCETE</th>
  <th>BARDEZ</th>
  <th>OLD CONQUESTS</th>
  <th>NEW CONQUESTS</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1880</td>
  <td>1562</td>
  <td>9050</td>
  <td>15623</td>
  <td>26235</td>
  <td>2981</td>
  <td>29216</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1890</td>
  <td>1972</td>
  <td>9203</td>
  <td>18743</td>
  <td>29918</td>
  <td>2981</td>
  <td>32899</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1900</td>
  <td>3564</td>
  <td>11881</td>
  <td>19598</td>
  <td>35043</td>
  <td>1978</td>
  <td>37021</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1906</td>
  <td>3340</td>
  <td>15814</td>
  <td>19679</td>
  <td>38833</td>
  <td>3612</td>
  <td>42445</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1907</td>
  <td>3702</td>
  <td>17084</td>
  <td>19557</td>
  <td>40343</td>
  <td>3500</td>
  <td>43843</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1908</td>
  <td>3699</td>
  <td>16817</td>
  <td>20530</td>
  <td>41046</td>
  <td>3605</td>
  <td>44651</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1909</td>
  <td>3950</td>
  <td>17113</td>
  <td>20932</td>
  <td>41995</td>
  <td>3654</td>
  <td>45649</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1910</td>
  <td>3954</td>
  <td>18773</td>
  <td>21164</td>
  <td>43891</td>
  <td>3557</td>
  <td>47448</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>25743</td>
  <td>115735</td>
  <td>155826</td>
  <td>297304</td>
  <td>25868</td>
  <td>323172</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>%</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>36</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>92</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Some Aspects of the Consumption History of Estado da
  India: 1900-50 by Dr Remy Dias</em></p>
  <p>The trend of emigration continued till Goa was liberated, and also
  for various other reasons like the economic blockade imposed by
  independent India. Many people left their land because their
  family-earners in India could not remit money to Goa freely.<a
  href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> Besides, a series of epidemics
  that broke out at the beginning of the 20th century, especially of
  influenza, hit the Old Conquests taking a heavy toll of lives.</p>
  <p>The third study is an official document of the Government of Goa,
  called Goa Migration Study 2008. It’s a sample survey conducted by the
  NRI Commission of Goa of 6000 households selected by the Stratified
  Multistage Random Sampling Method. Of these, 3100 households studied
  in the report are from the three major talukas of the Old Conquests:
  Salcete, Tiswadi and Bardez. The report examines various aspects of
  the life of these Goans, who travelled outside Goa as emigrants
  (settled outside) as well as migrants (moved out for jobs, education,
  etc.) as well as returned-emigrants and returned-migrants, who
  resettled in Goa.</p>
  <p>As per this study, almost 60,000 Goans had migrated in 1931, out of
  which 45,000 settled in Bombay, 3500 in Karachi, 1000 in Calcutta and
  800 in Rangoon, besides other parts of India. Nearly 85 per cent among
  them were Christians; only 7500 were Hindus and Muslims. After
  recession hit British India in 1930, many Goans either returned home
  or went to the Gulf. But in 1938, around 55,000 Goans were left
  behind. After World War II, as Bombay grew as a business centre, the
  number soared to one lakh, out of which the majority occupied
  positions in business, liberal professions and administration, as well
  as in public services like restaurants, guest houses, and tailoring
  shops. By the time Pakistan was created, several Goans there had
  established business houses and large public companies which they
  headed as their chief executives. Many streets in Karachi were named
  after eminent Goans. However, many young Goans left Karachi. In 1958,
  Karachi had 5000 Goans.<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
  <p>The trend of out-migration, especially by the Christian community,
  continues till date. Due to this, in the last 60 years since
  liberation, the 38 per cent Christian population of Goa has reduced to
  25 per cent; from one-third to one-fourth of Goa’s total population.
  These are the figures from the 2011 census. The 2021 census is
  certainly expected to show further reduction, also because a large
  chunk of the population has migrated to the UK during this decade, by
  adopting Portuguese citizenship and giving up their Indian
  citizenship.</p>
  <p>If not for this huge exodus of Christians, the political scenario
  vis-a-vis elections would have been totally different today. Goa would
  have continued to be a Christian-dominated state. This issue cropped
  up significantly during the Opinion Poll of 1967, when Dr Jack de
  Sequeira’s United Goans Party demanded voting rights for the Goan
  expatriates. Did they get the right to decide about the identity of
  their state? It is one of the interesting episodes in the chapter in
  this book, dedicated to this unique historic and exciting referendum
  held in the Indian Republic.</p>
  <h2 id="foreigner-goenkars">Foreigner <em>Goenkars</em></h2>
  <p>The next phase saw Goans migrating abroad and settling in those
  respective countries. This again consisted largely of Christians,
  since it was considered inauspicious and taboo for Hindus to cross the
  seas. The Hindus would actually be outcasts from the community if they
  did so. Hence, the number of Hindus migrating abroad was negligible.
  The Portuguese economy in Goa had almost collapsed, agriculture did
  not bear enough fruits for a comfortable living, and the promotion of
  education threw up new opportunities for the neglected Christians in
  Goan society. The migration began with East African countries in 1895
  and then took a real leap from the first decade of the 20th
  century.</p>
  <p>Margaret Frenz, a historian and Oxford University scholar who has
  studied migrations across the world, has written extensively on
  migrations from Asia and also specifically from Goa. According to her,
  the main focus of Goan migrations was on East Africa. Goans migrated
  in two phases: in the first decade to settle in East Africa, and then
  in the second half of the 20th century to settle across the ‘western
  world’ in the UK, Canada, USA, Australia, New Zealand, Brazil,
  Portugal, and other countries. She not only deals with migrations but
  also with how Goans settled down in different countries of Africa as a
  Goan community, their social and cultural behaviour, and their active
  involvement in local politics.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
  <p>It sounds quite interesting when their brothers and sisters living
  in Goa today keep grumbling about the ‘invasion’ of Goa by our own
  Indian migrants from other states, especially the labour and trading
  class, whom we humiliate as Ghantis. More interestingly, our Goans
  living abroad are now financing the political outfits that have sprung
  up in Goa to fight elections on the grounds of ethnicity, with their
  vote-guns pointed at the politicians who nurture vote banks of
  migrants. But when the migration of Goans abroad is studied from a
  socio-cultural viewpoint, their tales sound similar to what we witness
  among the migrants in Goa today.</p>
  <h5 id="east-africa">EAST AFRICA</h5>
  <p>The Industrial Revolution in Europe and the USA had a direct
  repercussion on Estado da India in terms of new opportunities for
  employment, including self-employment. The destination was British
  colonies in East Africa. The first Goan ‘pioneers’ migrated in 1895 to
  Zanzibar, an island in Tanzania, to work in the administrative units
  of the Imperial British East Africa Company and then to Mombasa,
  Dar-es-Salaam, and Nairobi between 1900 to 1907, once again to work in
  the administrative setup of the construction companies of Uganda
  Railway. By 1911, around 1200 Goan clerical officers worked in the
  Kenyan and Uganda administrations. The treasury and audit departments
  were completely in Goan hands. It was a three-tiered system on ethnic
  lines, with Europeans in the top tier, African staff in the lower
  ranks, and Indians (including Goans) in the middle.</p>
  <p>A chain movement then started off, of getting Goan family members,
  relatives, and fellow villagers to work in different parts of East
  Africa, not only in the administrative service but also in various
  professions and business enterprises in which Goans had expertise.
  This included hotels, restaurants, bars, bakeries, photo studios,
  tailoring shops, teaching, healthcare, law firms, etc. The following
  table is a census conducted in these countries, where Goans were
  listed separately and not with other Indians since they came from the
  Portuguese Estado da India.</p>
  <p>Goans In East Africa (1911-1948)</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>Year</th>
  <th>KENYA</th>
  <th>UGANDA</th>
  <th>ZANZIBAR</th>
  <th>TANGANYIKA</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1911</td>
  <td>1136</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>440</td>
  <td>656</td>
  <td>2232</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1921</td>
  <td>2431</td>
  <td>474</td>
  <td>869</td>
  <td>798</td>
  <td>4572</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1928</td>
  <td>3131</td>
  <td>929</td>
  <td>954</td>
  <td>1445</td>
  <td>6459</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1931</td>
  <td>3979</td>
  <td>1124</td>
  <td>1004</td>
  <td>1722</td>
  <td>7829</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1938</td>
  <td>6205</td>
  <td>1257</td>
  <td>871</td>
  <td>1839</td>
  <td>10172</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1948</td>
  <td>7159</td>
  <td>1448</td>
  <td>681</td>
  <td>2006</td>
  <td>11294</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>24041</td>
  <td>5232</td>
  <td>4819</td>
  <td>8466</td>
  <td>42558</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Global Goans, Migration Movements and Identity in a
  Historical Perspective by Margaret Frenz, University of Oxford
  (2007)</em></p>
  <p>The major attraction however was the ‘government service’ since it
  had a hefty salary, a permanent position, prospects for promotion and
  other benefits, as well as six-months of leave every four years. This
  allowed Goans to visit their homes in Goa regularly and leave their
  children behind with their grandparents for ‘good education’ in
  Goa.</p>
  <p>The sports and culture-loving Goans set up their own clubs in major
  cities, conducting sports tournaments, regular parties, dances, and
  celebrating their own festivals. Marriages took place strictly within
  the Goan community through these regular social interactions at the
  clubs, sports events, and schools meant for Goan communities. The most
  popular sport was hockey, followed by badminton, cricket, tennis,
  table tennis, billiards, and others.</p>
  <p>Besides village communities celebrating their Goan festivals
  locally, the feast of St Francis Xavier was celebrated throughout East
  Africa on the 3rd of December each year. Quite a number of East
  African Catholic churches were built with generous Goan support,
  including prominent ones like the St Francis Xavier Church in Nairobi,
  and Christ the King Cathedral in Kampala.</p>
  <p>Goans in East African countries were also active in politics. The
  freedom movement in India had an impact on the nationalist movement in
  East Africa. With their involvement in local politics, two Goans
  reached one of the highest positions in Kenya. Joseph Murumbi
  (1911-1990) and Pio Gama Pinto (1927-1965) were the second
  vice-presidents of Kenya. Pinto was shot dead in 1965, the first
  victim of a series of political assassinations.</p>
  <p>However, the situation changed drastically in the 1960s when East
  Africa achieved independence and nation-states were created with
  international boundaries. Uganda attained independence in 1962 and Idi
  Amin seized power in early 1971. Zanzibar and Kenya became independent
  in 1963 and Mozambique in 1975. Meanwhile Goa was also freed from the
  four-and-a-half century colonial rule of the Portuguese in 1961. There
  was total Africanisation of the local administration all across East
  Africa. New immigration acts came into force and the rights of
  Commonwealth citizens (including Indian Goans) grew restricted in
  terms of citizenship. Furthermore, the revolution in Zanzibar in 1964,
  the expulsion of Asians from Uganda in 1972, and the coup in Kenya in
  1982 created an atmosphere of apprehension in the Goan community.</p>
  <p>Goans had no other option than to leave. But very few Goans came
  back to Goa and hardly anyone preferred Portugal. Most of them moved
  to other industrialised western countries like the UK, Canada, USA,
  Australia, New Zealand, Brazil etc.</p>
  <p>In 1972, approximately 29,000 Asians arrived in the UK from Uganda,
  including Goans. One survey conducted by the Goan community in 1970
  found 5000 Goans settled in London city alone. While 80 per cent among
  them found white collar jobs, others had to start afresh or work in
  lower positions and work their way up in various careers, from
  hairdressers to university professors and IT and finance
  professionals. Margaret Frenz writes that in 2007, there were 800
  Goans left in Kenya, 500 in Tanzania, 100 in Zanzibar and 50 in
  Uganda.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
  <h5 id="usa">USA</h5>
  <p>Goan settlers began arriving in the US from East Africa around 80
  years ago. In 1990, the US had 5000 Goan families, mostly Goan
  Christians.<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> However, the 21st century has
  witnessed a large migration of Goan Hindus to the US, mainly as IT
  professionals. Till January 2020, 12.80 lakh Indians are recorded to
  be living in the US, which, of course, includes Goans.<a href="#fn12"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  <h5 id="portugal">PORTUGAL</h5>
  <p>Despite Goa being a colony of Portugal for over four centuries, the
  number of Goans settled in Portugal is less compared to other European
  countries. The embassy of India in Portugal, on its website, states
  that there are 90,000 people belonging to Indian-origin diaspora and
  another 30,000 Indian nationals. However the Goans there − all
  Catholics – number barely 15,000. In fact, the Indian Hindus in
  Portugal amount to almost the largest chunk of which comes from
  Gujarat (40,000), probably including Daman and Diu, followed by Punjab
  (30,000), Haryana (10,000) and Kerala (2000). The Sikhs are 35,000 and
  Muslims are 20,000.<a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> Another study conducted in 1992
  states that there are 11,000 Goans in Portugal, of whom 6000 live in
  Lisbon.<a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  <p>However this may not include the Goans, mostly Hindu goldsmiths,
  who had migrated in the early 16th century, or the upper-class
  Christians and Hindus who moved there in the second half of the 19th
  century. Most of them migrated for higher education and settled there
  as clerks, doctors, engineers, lawyers, magistrates, teachers,
  journalists, officials in armed forces, and bureaucrats.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“There are thus broadly four distinct groups of Goans who have
  settled in Portugal; (i) those who came straight from Goa and settled
  down in Portugal during the colonial regime, which can be classified
  as pre-1961; (ii) those who came from Goa post-1961 after Goa was
  taken over by India; (iii) those who came via Africa, especially the
  former Portuguese colonies, particularly after the independence of
  Angola and Mozambique; and (iv) more recently those who have migrated
  to Portugal with a view to settling in other developed countries in
  Europe or elsewhere."</em><a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref15" role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The latest migration Goa is presently witnessing for the last three
  decades is that of thousands of Goans, mostly Christians but also
  including some Hindus. They have taken advantage of the provision in
  Portuguese law that allows those born before Goa’s liberation in
  December 1961 and two generations thereafter to opt for Portuguese
  nationality. As Portuguese citizens, they are EU passport holders and
  thus eligible to move, live, and work across the bloc. However, it
  needs to be seen how much the decision of BREXIT, the exit of the UK
  from the EU, will affect the ongoing migration of Goans to the UK via
  Portugal.</p>
  <p>The British government has already assured enough security to those
  who are already working there. Two types of status will be granted to
  Goan-origin Portuguese and other EU citizens: Settled status for those
  who have lived in the UK for five years or more, and pre-settled
  status for those who have been in the UK for less than five years.</p>
  <p>No authentic figures are available to ascertain how many Goans have
  given up their Indian citizenship, adopted Portuguese citizenship, and
  actually migrated to the UK.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The citizenship is granted directly in Lisbon by the Central
  Civil Registrar… There are an estimated 17,000 Goans with Portuguese
  citizenship living in the UK. Only a minority of these migrants remain
  in Portugal. According to an unconfirmed source, there is currently a
  waiting list of 12 to 13 thousand for passports at the Portuguese
  consulate in Goa and a few thousand passports are issued to such
  applicants each year. There are also some recent instances of
  non-Goans who have sought to apply for Portuguese nationality, using
  false papers.”</em><a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>WORLD POLITICIANS OF GOAN ORIGIN</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>COUNTRY</th>
  <th>NAME</th>
  <th>HIGHEST POSITION HELD</th>
  <th>YEAR</th>
  <th>BORN</th>
  <th>ORIGIN</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Portugal</td>
  <td>Alfredo Nobre da Costa</td>
  <td>Prime Minister</td>
  <td>1978</td>
  <td>Lisbon, 1923</td>
  <td>Goa</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Narana Coissoro</td>
  <td>Member, Assembly of Republic</td>
  <td>1976-2005</td>
  <td>Goa, 1933</td>
  <td>Panaji</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>Alfredo Bruto da Costa</td>
  <td>Minister for Health &amp; Social Welfare</td>
  <td>1979</td>
  <td>Goa, 1938</td>
  <td>Margao</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Nelson de Souza</td>
  <td>Minister for Planning</td>
  <td>2019</td>
  <td>Goa, 1954</td>
  <td>Goa</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>Antonio Costa</td>
  <td>Prime Minister</td>
  <td>2015</td>
  <td>Lisbon, 1961</td>
  <td>Margao</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Jorge Barreto Xavier</td>
  <td>Secretary of State &amp; Culture</td>
  <td>2012</td>
  <td>Goa, 1965</td>
  <td>Goa</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>Joao Leao Fernandes</td>
  <td>Finance Minister</td>
  <td>2020</td>
  <td>Lisbon, 1974</td>
  <td>Sarzora</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>UK</td>
  <td>Ernest Soares (Gaitonde)</td>
  <td>MP from Barnstaple</td>
  <td>1900</td>
  <td>Goa, 1864</td>
  <td>Ucassaim</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>Valarie Vaz</td>
  <td>MP from Walsall South</td>
  <td>2010</td>
  <td>Aden, 1954</td>
  <td>Assolna</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Keith Vaz</td>
  <td>Minister of State for Europe</td>
  <td>1999</td>
  <td>Aden, 1956</td>
  <td>Assolna</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td>Sayonara Luxton</td>
  <td>Mayor of Windsor &amp; Maidenhead, UK</td>
  <td>2016</td>
  <td>Goa, 1955</td>
  <td>Colvale</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Seulla Braverman</td>
  <td>MP from Fareham</td>
  <td>2015</td>
  <td>London, 1980</td>
  <td>Assagao</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Kenya</td>
  <td>Pio Gama Pinto</td>
  <td>Member of Central Legislative Assembly</td>
  <td>1963</td>
  <td>Nairobi, 1927</td>
  <td>Goa</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>Joseph Murumbi-Zuzarte</td>
  <td>2nd Vice President</td>
  <td>1966</td>
  <td>Kenya, 1911</td>
  <td>Goa</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Pakistan</td>
  <td>Cincinnatus Fabian D'Abreu</td>
  <td>Councillor, Karachi Municipality</td>
  <td>1900</td>
  <td>Goa, 1862</td>
  <td>Saligao</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>Goans when settled abroad not only assimilated into their new
  countries but some of them also played a major role in politics. Some
  of them reached the highest possible positions. Portugal had two prime
  ministers of Goan origin and four in ministerial positions. Similarly,
  Kenya had a Goan as the second vice-president. The following table has
  listed 15 Goans who reached high positions in four countries. Half of
  them were born in Goa and then migrated to the respective
  countries.</p>
  <p>One among them, Sayonara Luxton, the Mayor of Windsor and
  Maidenhead in the UK, was brought up in Goa, schooled in Mapusa, and
  then moved to Dubai at the age of 21. She then moved to the UK in
  1993. Recognising her social work among the drug-addicted youngsters,
  her town elected her as councillor. She then rose to the position of
  deputy mayor and eventually became Mayor.</p>
  <p>While we proudly celebrate the elevation of our Goenkars in
  political positions in foreign countries, in Goa, we look at our own
  Indian migrants as a ‘threat to Goa’ if they rise up in political
  positions after working sincerely in social and political fields. Is
  Goa’s politics stooping to regional and ethnic fanaticism while our
  bright Goans with a worldwide vision shine in different parts of the
  world? Goa’s ‘broadminded’ politics needs introspection indeed!</p>
  <h5 id="gulf">GULF</h5>
  <p>The oil boom in the Gulf region of Middle East in the 1960s and
  1970s lasted till early 1990s. Thousands of Goans, from the Old and
  New Conquests, largely Christians but also Hindus, made fortunes by
  working at various levels in the Gulf.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“There were 50,000 Goans in Kuwait, Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the
  70s and a total of 150,000 Goans in the Gulf in 1987. Goan migration
  to the Middle East was never a permanent phenomenon since the
  countries in that region do not grant citizenship to foreign
  nationals; however, many have spent decades there. Goans still prefer
  to move to those countries, believing that a job there would be more
  rewarding than employment in Goa.”</em><a href="#fn17"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Goans who migrated to the Middle East have not settled there
  permanently, neither do Goans who are now going to the UK with
  Portuguese citizenship have plans to settle in Europe. But unlike the
  Gulf Goans, the ‘Portuguese Goans’ have given up their citizenship. In
  both these categories, Goa has received a huge amount of remittances,
  which are being invested in education, medical treatment and housing.
  However, since India has no system of dual citizenship like the
  Portuguese, these migrated Goans have opted for OCI (Overseas Citizen
  of India) cards, in order to have a hold over their properties in Goa.
  But this is not a permanent solution.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Remittances to Goa, around Rs 700 crore (annually) have a
  significant effect on the economy. Remittances are 6.3 per cent of the
  State Domestic Product of Goa. Remittances are one-third of the
  revenue receipt of Goa but only 6 per cent of the Government
  expenditure.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>But this has slowed down substantially due to the worldwide
  pandemic of Covid19. Thousands of migrants working abroad as well as
  the emigrants have come down to Goa. They have no source of income.
  Their future is uncertain since it is not known when the waves of
  Covid19 will permanently die down. While the Christian community,
  especially in the Old Conquests, is fuming over this, it would not be
  surprising if this becomes a major election issue. But, right now, no
  political party seems to be seriously applying its mind over this
  economic crisis.</p>
  <h3 id="are-migrants-outgrowing-goans">Are Migrants Outgrowing
  Goans?</h3>
  <p>The emigration of Christian Goans did not stop after Goa’s
  liberation. But the trend of leaving Goa and settling outside did slow
  down. In fact many Christians who had settled in other Portuguese
  colonies in East Africa came back to their motherland. Despite this,
  the Christian population of Goa has kept shrinking.</p>
  <p>The graph below shows a decline in Christian population even after
  liberation, in the last 50 years. In the New Conquests, it has
  declined marginally from 15 to 11 per cent. But in the Old Conquests,
  it has slipped down from 56 per cent to 35 per cent.<a href="#fn18"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18" role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a>
  That’s stunning!</p>
  <p><em>Source: Census of India</em></p>
  <p>The graph shows that this trend in the last 50 years (till 2011
  census) is more visible in the Old Conquests, where the Hindu
  population has increased substantially, by almost 13 per cent. Added
  to this is the eight per cent rise in the Muslim population, though
  small in numbers. This has affected the number of Christians in the
  Old Conquests. There is a sharp decline of 21 per cent, due to
  emigration as well as in-migration of non-Christians.</p>
  <p>A few Christians however have also migrated to Goa from coastal
  states like Kerala or tribal hilly states like Jharkhand. But the
  emigration of the Christian community is not the sole reason for its
  declining population in Goa. Added to this is the huge amount of
  in-migration of Indian Hindus and Muslims from other states due to
  which Christian population is proportionately declining. The Christian
  population at the time of Goa’s liberation was 2.25 lakhs. Today, it
  has risen to 3.66 lakhs, a steady rise of around 62 per cent. But
  compared to this, the Hindu population has soared in the last 50 years
  from 3.54 lakhs to 9.64 lakhs, a rise of 150 per cent. The Muslim
  population has also risen from 12,000 in 1961 to 1.22 lakhs in 2011,
  generally due to in-migration.</p>
  <p>It’s an interesting phenomenon that Goan Christians go all over the
  world and set up shop and take up different professions in the service
  industry. But similar opportunities in Goa are overlooked by them.
  This vacuum is then filled by Indian migrants from other states,
  especially in trade and business. Goa’s migrant population does not
  include the working class labourers alone but also the middle class
  traders, upper middle class professionals and also the upper class
  retired elite of India. In addition, most celebrities in India have a
  second home in Goa.</p>
  <p>But what is the actual migrant population residing in Goa today,
  since 1961? Unfortunately, no government has bothered to conduct any
  extensive survey in this regard nor has any political party demanded
  it. However the politicians are busy competing with each other to win
  over these ‘vote banks’ by providing them basic amenities like
  housing, water, electricity, ration, etc., not as their basic right as
  Indian citizens, but as ‘favours’. The only data available is the
  Census conducted every 10 years by the central government. But it is
  not very accurate in the count of migrants since they have different
  criteria set to measure the in-migration.</p>
  <p>The quantifying of migrant population is a complex exercise but it
  is needed to understand the current demographics of Goa. Understanding
  this is of utmost importance because there are sweeping statements
  made by responsible leaders of the society including ministers,
  businessmen, educationists, and even priests, that migrants from other
  states are flooding the state in a big way. If this trend continues,
  Goans would be pushed into a minority. Is it true? Let us examine
  this.</p>
  <p>The table below shows some interesting statistics. It shows the
  decadal growth in Goa’s rural and urban population. Urbanisation is a
  normal trend in which we always find an increase in urban population
  and a decline in rural population. In the first decade after Goa’s
  liberation, in 1971, the rural population shows a normal growth of 18
  per cent. Despite this, the urban population has grown by 133 per
  cent. Obviously, this is not just due to Goan villagers rushing to the
  cities but due to a huge influx of migrants.</p>
  <p>Decadal Growth In Rural-Urban Population: 1960-2011</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>YEAR</th>
  <th>TOTAL</th>
  <th>RURAL POPULATION</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>URBAN POPULATION</th>
  <th></th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>PERSONS</td>
  <td>GROWTH</td>
  <td>PERSONS</td>
  <td>GROWTH</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1950</td>
  <td>547448</td>
  <td>476517</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>70931</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1960</td>
  <td>589997</td>
  <td>502668</td>
  <td>5.49</td>
  <td>87329</td>
  <td>23.12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1971</td>
  <td>795120</td>
  <td>591877</td>
  <td>17.75</td>
  <td>203243</td>
  <td>132.73</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1981</td>
  <td>1007749</td>
  <td>684964</td>
  <td>15.73</td>
  <td>322785</td>
  <td>58.82</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1991</td>
  <td>1169793</td>
  <td>690041</td>
  <td>0.74</td>
  <td>479752</td>
  <td>48.63</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>2001</td>
  <td>1343998</td>
  <td>675129</td>
  <td>-2.16</td>
  <td>668869</td>
  <td>39.42</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2011</td>
  <td>1458545</td>
  <td>551731</td>
  <td>-18.28</td>
  <td>906814</td>
  <td>35.57</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Census of India</em></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The port town of Mormugao is a classic example of this
  phenomenon where the growth of population recorded was as high as
  579.70 per cent during the last decade. The town of Madgao in Salcete
  taluka is a big commercial centre of the territory which has recorded
  a high growth rate 216.28 per cent, next to the port town of Mormugao.
  A number of smallscale units located on the periphery of the Madgao
  town had also helped add up to its population during the
  decade.”</em><a href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The Census report also observes that the migrants did not consist
  of merely the working class but also others who cited various
  opportunities due to the developmental works taken up by the Indian
  and Goa government. As a Union Territory, opportunities sprang up in
  the field of education, health, transport, and construction work. For
  example, Goa’s 614 educational institutes in 1960 increased to 1441,
  including a few colleges in the cities and primary schools all across
  the Goan countryside. This brought in a large number of teachers,
  especially from Maharashtra. Goa had only 38 hospitals and health
  centres, which rose to 262, creating job opportunities for doctors,
  nurses, compounders etc. The construction activities taken up to
  develop infrastructure needed labour. This led to migration from
  Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu etc.</p>
  <p>The following table compiled from the Census reports explains it
  with a state-wise break-up. It is based on the information recorded
  about a person living in Goa but was born in another state. Of course
  it includes a Goan born outside the state and does not include a
  migrant child born in Goa. But it still certainly provides a rough
  picture. Unfortunately, this data is not available beyond the 1981
  census.</p>
  <p>Even during Portuguese rule, Goa had migrants, not only from other
  states of India but also from other countries, besides 6689
  Portuguese. There were 461 Africans, French, Germans, Italians,
  Egyptians, Spanish, Japanese and even Chinese. None of them are found
  in the 1971 census. The total number of migrants from within India was
  6085. This number however jumped to nearly one lakh in the first ten
  years and then went on swelling every decade. In 1991, it rose to 1.70
  lakhs, but interestingly, reduced to 1.20 lakhs in 2001. The census
  figures of migrants in the 2011 census have not yet been released.</p>
  <p>Why is the number of ‘migrants’ reducing? The reason is found again
  in the Census. By 1991, almost half of these migrants were found to be
  living in Goa for more than 10 and 20 years. Almost one-fourth of them
  live for more than 10 years, and around 18 per cent for more than 20
  years. No figures in this category are available in the 2001 Census
  and the 2011 figures are not yet out. While these figures are derived
  from the state they were born in, their children were born in Goa and
  even their parents have become Niz Goenkar since they have been living
  here for the last 50 years. A large chunk of them also speak fluent
  Konkani. This assumption is proved by yet another Census finding,
  based on their mother tongue.</p>
  <p>Migrants In Goa From States In India: Census</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>STATE</th>
  <th>1961</th>
  <th>1971</th>
  <th>1981</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Karnataka</td>
  <td>1017</td>
  <td>33510</td>
  <td>71976</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Maharashtra</td>
  <td>3751</td>
  <td>33579</td>
  <td>52077</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Kerala</td>
  <td>113</td>
  <td>5329</td>
  <td>8136</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>UP</td>
  <td>527</td>
  <td>5241</td>
  <td>5110</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Andhra</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>2889</td>
  <td>3547</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tamilnadu</td>
  <td>192</td>
  <td>2640</td>
  <td>3320</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Gujarat</td>
  <td>137</td>
  <td>1496</td>
  <td>1841</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>W Bengal</td>
  <td>54</td>
  <td>716</td>
  <td>995</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>MP</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>617</td>
  <td>934</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Orissa</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>189</td>
  <td>797</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bihar</td>
  <td>9</td>
  <td>733</td>
  <td>770</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Rajasthan</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>667</td>
  <td>717</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Punjab</td>
  <td>27</td>
  <td>1052</td>
  <td>715</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Delhi</td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>341</td>
  <td>638</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Haryana</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>504</td>
  <td>324</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Himachal</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>283</td>
  <td>198</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>J&amp;K</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>133</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Assam</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>177</td>
  <td>128</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>UTs</td>
  <td>44</td>
  <td>59</td>
  <td>128</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tripura</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>24</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Meghalaya</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>23</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Sikkim</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Manipur</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Nagaland</td>
  <td>0</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>6085</td>
  <td>90133</td>
  <td>152555</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Census of India</em></p>
  <p>MOTHER TONGUE OF GOANS: CENSUS INDIA</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>LANGUAGE</th>
  <th>1961</th>
  <th>1971</th>
  <th>1981</th>
  <th>1991</th>
  <th>2001</th>
  <th>2011</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Konkani</td>
  <td>556297</td>
  <td>556237</td>
  <td>600004</td>
  <td>602513</td>
  <td>769805</td>
  <td>963980</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Marathi</td>
  <td>11630</td>
  <td>168339</td>
  <td>265803</td>
  <td>390220</td>
  <td>304208</td>
  <td>158757</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Hindi</td>
  <td>1647</td>
  <td>11375</td>
  <td>20498</td>
  <td>31873</td>
  <td>63921</td>
  <td>126020</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Kannada</td>
  <td>945</td>
  <td>16504</td>
  <td>33473</td>
  <td>54292</td>
  <td>74615</td>
  <td>67923</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Urdu</td>
  <td>9414</td>
  <td>18910</td>
  <td>27580</td>
  <td>39927</td>
  <td>54163</td>
  <td>41242</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Malayalam</td>
  <td>120</td>
  <td>5620</td>
  <td>7562</td>
  <td>12919</td>
  <td>15081</td>
  <td>12983</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Telugu</td>
  <td>209</td>
  <td>3870</td>
  <td>5527</td>
  <td>7887</td>
  <td>11926</td>
  <td>11116</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>English</td>
  <td>614</td>
  <td>2654</td>
  <td>6367</td>
  <td>4816</td>
  <td>8190</td>
  <td>9765</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bhojpuri</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>439</td>
  <td>3197</td>
  <td>9185</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Lamani</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>3690</td>
  <td>5896</td>
  <td>7300</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bengali</td>
  <td>41</td>
  <td>709</td>
  <td>800</td>
  <td>1836</td>
  <td>4111</td>
  <td>7099</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Tamil</td>
  <td>286</td>
  <td>2233</td>
  <td>3861</td>
  <td>6770</td>
  <td>7903</td>
  <td>6947</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Gujarati</td>
  <td>1345</td>
  <td>2444</td>
  <td>3164</td>
  <td>4432</td>
  <td>9273</td>
  <td>6846</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Oriya</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>151</td>
  <td>97</td>
  <td>679</td>
  <td>2681</td>
  <td>5558</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Bhilli</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>39</td>
  <td>206</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>2665</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Nepali</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>450</td>
  <td>960</td>
  <td>2135</td>
  <td>2600</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Other</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>5099</td>
  <td>2635</td>
  <td>2400</td>
  <td>2500</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Rajasthani</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>296</td>
  <td>1060</td>
  <td>2202</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Punjabi</td>
  <td>14</td>
  <td>1260</td>
  <td>1229</td>
  <td>1825</td>
  <td>1815</td>
  <td>1959</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Banjari</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>708</td>
  <td>1728</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Marwari</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>244</td>
  <td>583</td>
  <td>1407</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Assamese</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>97</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>144</td>
  <td>195</td>
  <td>1107</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Sanskrit</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>46</td>
  <td>1055</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Sindhi</td>
  <td>53</td>
  <td>227</td>
  <td>369</td>
  <td>300</td>
  <td>527</td>
  <td>656</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Kashmiri</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>10</td>
  <td>212</td>
  <td>472</td>
  <td>372</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Manipuri</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>49</td>
  <td>367</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Others</td>
  <td>239</td>
  <td>182</td>
  <td>428</td>
  <td>884</td>
  <td>1331</td>
  <td>898</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Census of India</em></p>
  <p>These figures of the mother tongue simply don’t match with the
  figures of migrants from other states. For example, we know that
  people from Karnataka are still migrating. In 1981 they numbered
  72,000. Three decades after that, there are only 68,000
  Kannada-speaking people. It means the onetime Kannadigas have
  assimilated in Goan soil and have been registering their mother tongue
  as Konkani. Let’s take yet another example. The most humiliated Indian
  community (Ghanti) among these are the Lamanis, who are also called
  Banjara. The Goa Banjara Samaj President Suresh Rajput once told me in
  a TV debate that over one lakh Lamanis are settled in Goa and they
  have come from different states. Despite this, in the 2011 Census,
  only 9028 have registered their mother tongue either as Lamani or
  Banjari.</p>
  <p>This can be also argued as a well-planned design of the migrants in
  order to grab all kinds of benefits Goans get. Do they get these
  benefits? There was a survey conducted in 2006 by Children’s Rights in
  Goa (CRG), an NGO working for the welfare and rights of children of
  Goa. The survey was fully focussed on Goa’s migrant labour and their
  children. The findings were a real eye opener, exploding all kinds of
  myths we believe about migrant labourers. Let me cite a few of
  them:</p>
  <p>More than one-third of migrant labourers have been living in Goa
  for over 15 years and legally fall in a domicile category, meaning
  they are Goans by all measures. More than half of them live in rented
  premises, 16 per cent live in their own houses and hardly eight per
  cent live in shanties (slums). Fish and rice is a staple food for over
  half of them and 17 per cent among them eat Xit-Koddi. Nearly 60 per
  cent of the adults and over 80 per cent of children speak Hindi, but
  over 40 per cent of adults and nearly 65 per cent of children also
  speak Konkani. They are the vote bank of politicians, this is the
  usual allegation. In reality, half of them don’t vote and 20 per cent
  of them vote in their native states since they have no local voting
  cards. Almost two third of them want to settle in Goa and 96 per cent
  of children ‘like’ Goa.<a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref20" role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a></p>
  <p>Do we find it surprising? What did our ancestors do? The first
  settlers of Mundari tribe came from Chota Nagpur in Bihar. This was
  followed by ‘migrants’ (Ghanti?) coming from Indian states like
  Bengal, Orissa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
  Maharashtra, etc. as well as foreign countries like Afghanistan,
  Pakistan, Iraq, Europe, Arab countries etc. After living here for many
  generations and getting assimilated completely with the local
  language, culture and lifestyle, we call ourselves Niz Goenkars. Not
  enough; we − the migrants at one time − call the new migrants Ghantis
  and look at them as a threat!</p>
  <p>At the same time, we Goans go all over the world to work, settle
  there, assimilate there and even establish ourselves successfully in
  all kinds of fields, from business to politics. When some of them
  become mayors and presidents of the country, it’s a proud moment for
  us. Not a threat to those respective countries! Is this not a double
  standard? Let’s introspect.</p>
  <p>Why do we look at the neo-migrants as a threat to Goa? Because we
  go out and they come in. We seize the opportunities available all
  around the world while they jump at the opportunities getting created
  in Goa. And then we fear that one day they will outgrow us. Goa’s
  politics has been moving around this anxiety. Is there truth in this
  unknown fear?</p>
  <p>The table of the people who have registered their mother tongue as
  Konkani or Marathi, coupled with the people who were born outside Goa;
  in Maharashtra. The figures of Marathi speaking and Maharashtrians
  simply do not match. When the Konkani-Marathi controversy started
  heating up in Goa, a call was given by Marathi protagonists to the
  Goans to register their mother tongue as Marathi. In response, the
  number of Goans calling themselves ‘Marathi’ went on rising till the
  historic official language agitation of 1986.</p>
  <p>Konkani &amp; Marathi Of Goa &amp; Maharashtra</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>LANGUAGE</th>
  <th>1961</th>
  <th>1971</th>
  <th>1981</th>
  <th>1991</th>
  <th>2001</th>
  <th>2011</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Konkani</td>
  <td>556297</td>
  <td>556237</td>
  <td>600004</td>
  <td>602513</td>
  <td>769805</td>
  <td>963980</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Marathi</td>
  <td>11630</td>
  <td>168339</td>
  <td>265803</td>
  <td>390220</td>
  <td>304208</td>
  <td>158757</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Maharashtrians</td>
  <td>3751</td>
  <td>33579</td>
  <td>52077</td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Source: Census of India</em></p>
  <p>The issue was finally resolved in 1987, around which time the
  Census of 1991 was also conducted. In the heat of agitation, the
  number of ‘Marathis’ rose up to 3.90 lakh, which was almost half of
  the ‘Konkanis’ registered in the Census. With the language controversy
  cooling down in the 21st century and the new generation opting for
  Konkani, the number of ‘Marathi Goans’ has now reduced to half of the
  number registered in the 2001 Census. It is bound to reduce further in
  the 2021 Census. The graph is a clear indication of the trend.</p>
  <p>It needs to be seen how many ‘Marathi Goans’ remain in the 2021
  Census, along with the Goans born in Maharashtra. But even without
  them, the number of Konkani-speaking Goans remains three times more
  than the migrants. And if we add so called Marathi-speaking Goans to
  it, the number of migrants slips to one-fourth of Goa’s population. In
  that case, are we fighting a non-existent demon? Is it worth fighting
  elections on these fanatic grounds by aiming at soft targets like the
  migrant workers, whom Goa needs for our daily existence? Are we
  missing the target? Are they the real enemies of Goa? Or are the land
  sharks the real enemies, who are grabbing our land and selling it to
  build holiday homes to those for whom Goa is nothing but a holiday
  destination to exploit? And who are the ones who are selling our land
  to the land sharks? Friends of Goa? Are they <em>Niz Goenkar?
  Bhumiputras?</em></p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
  role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Mendonça Delio de: Conversions and
  Citizenry, Goa under the Portugal 1510-1610 P 85<a href="#fnref1"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>De Souza Teotonio: The Portuguese
  in Goa<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>Some Aspects of the Consumption
  History of Estado da India: 1900-50 by Remy Dias<a href="#fnref4"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>De Souza Teotonio: The Portuguese
  in Goa<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>Da Silva Gracias; Goans away from
  Goa, Migration to the Middle East<a href="#fnref6"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>Quality of life in colonial Goa by
  Fatima Gracias<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>Frenz Margaret; Global Goans,
  Migration Movements and Identity in a Historical Perspective<a
  href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>Ministry of External Affairs<a
  href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>Embassy of India, Lisbon,
  Portugal<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>Chanda Rupa &amp; Ghosh Sriparna;
  Goans in Portugal: Role of<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>ibid<a href="#fnref16"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Migration Study 2008<a
  href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>Census of India<a href="#fnref18"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>Census of India 1971<a
  href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn20" role="doc-endnote"><p>Talpankar Prashanti; Shadows in
  the Dark 2006<a href="#fnref20" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
