<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: History of Bhumiputras</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-3">Chapter 3</h3>
  <h1 id="history-of-bhumiputras">HISTORY OF <em>BHUMIPUTRAS</em></h1>
  <p>The history of Goa does not begin with the Portuguese conquest of
  Goa in 1510. Rather, it ends with the end of Portuguese colonisation,
  just 60 years ago.</p>
  <p>The Portuguese conquered the first island of Goa in the 16th
  century. Vasco da Gama discovered India for the European traders. When
  he landed first on 20 May 1498 at Calicut, he was guided by an Arab
  pilot. India at that time was trading with Arabs, due to which the sea
  is called the Arabian Sea.</p>
  <p>Neither does the history of Goa begin with Lord Parashuram, an
  incarnation of Lord Vishnu’s Dashavatara. The 'Sahyadri Khand', which
  tells us of his tale was added to the 'Skand Purana' later, probably
  to establish that Goa or <em>Gomantak Bhumi</em> was created by Lord
  Parashuram and that the Brahmins were the first settlers of Goa. One
  of the legends says that Parashuram, the warrior sage, stood on the
  peak of the Sahyadri Ghat and shot an arrow towards the sea. The water
  receded and the land rose from the sea. It was filled with salt and
  unsuitable for habitation; so Parashuram invoked the Snake King
  Vasuki, who spat holy poison and converted the soil into fertile lush
  green land. Out of respect, Vasuki and all snakes were appointed as
  protectors and guardians of the land.<a href="#fn1"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
  <p>The 'Sahyadri Khand' terms the Himalayas as <em>Devatma</em> (soul
  of the Gods) and Sahyadri as <em>Viratma</em> (soul of the heroes).
  The entire Sahyadri range does not touch the sea anywhere from River
  Tapi to Kanyakumari, because of Lord Parashuram’s heroic work. The
  Sapt Konkan, which Parashuram created from the North to the South
  includes Chiplun, Guhagar (now in the Konkan region of Maharashtra),
  Gomantak, Karahat, Karnat and Tuludesh. Parashuram then got Brahmins
  settled in Sapt Konkan, which included Bhargava, Nagare, Chitpavan,
  Karhade, Saraswat, Havik and Nambudri.<a href="#fn2"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
  <p>You may ask why this controversial issue is raised here as we
  discuss the elections and politics of Goa. It is not only important,
  rather the most important point, because the legend of Parashuram
  Bhoomi is directly connected to the land holdings of Goa, around which
  the politics of Goa has been moving right from ancient times till
  date. It is thus important to know who were the early settlers of Goa,
  to whom the land belonged to, how the Brahmins and a few Kshatriya
  Sardar classes became the <em>Bhatkars</em> (landlords) of Goa, and
  how the <em>Bahujan</em> politics evolved in Free Goa.</p>
  <h2 id="the-myth-of-parashuram-bhoomi">The Myth of <em>Parashuram
  Bhoomi</em></h2>
  <p>This mythological legend is challenged by many historians. It
  primarily tries to say that the Gaud Saraswat Brahmins were the first
  settlers in <em>Gomant Bhoomi</em> due to which it is called
  Parashuram Bhoomi. The tale claims that Parashuram brought 96 Saraswat
  Brahmin families from Tirhut (probably in Gaur, Bengal, now in Bihar)
  in Northern India and got them settled in the most fertile region of
  the Konkan, that is Goa. Out of them, 66 families occupied the 66
  villages of Sasastti (Salcete), and the remaining 30 families settled
  in the 30 villages of Tees-wadi (Tiswadi). Thereafter, these Brahmin
  families spread out into the neighbouring areas of Baradesh (of 12
  villages - Bardez), Pedne, Kudal (Sawantwadi), and other parts of the
  Konkan.</p>
  <p>While quoting several other historians, Gerard Pereira, an expert
  in history and political science, raises eyebrows over this myth:<a
  href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The legend of Parashurama’s reclamation of Goa and the
  subsequent settlement of the Saraswats therein, is questionable from
  both geographical and historical points of view. If the Gaud Saraswats
  were the first and early settlers in Goa, then how do we account for
  the existence of Dravidians, aboriginal Gavdas and Kunbis and other
  Aryan groups prior to their settlement? The legend itself would want
  us to believe that the mythical Parashurama annihilated the Kshatriyas
  not less than twentyone times before ‘creating’ new lands of Konkan.
  That would mean that the Konkan regions including Goa were inhabited
  by other people before the Gaud Saraswats came on the scene.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Prof D D Kosambi, a renowned historian and a Goan by origin, argues
  that such a dense, trackless mountainous jungle infested by snakes and
  tigers, was fit only for hardy pioneers; the strong west-coast monsoon
  brings on a rapid growth of the forest, which no Brahmin settlers
  could possibly have cleared without a labour supply. The problem was
  solved in remarkable fashion, by sharing profit between the Brahmins
  to whom the land was given and the actual workers on the land
  recruited from the aboriginal Gaudas (still both caste and tribe),
  with a few Kunbi and other low caste peasants.</p>
  <p>Pereira also quotes Dr Bhau Daji Lad, who states that</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“it does not appear that the Gaud Saraswat Brahmins came to Goa
  prior to 1000 CE but some seven to eight centuries ago.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The geologists, archaeologists, and historians have finally put
  this controversy to rest by explaining scientifically, how the entire
  Konkan coast got created. Anant Ramkrishna Sinai Dhume, a historian,
  in his acclaimed book <em>The Cultural History of Goa: From 10,000 BC
  to 1352 AD</em>, states:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“..the cultural history of Goa...; begins from the appearance
  of the land of Goa from the depths of the saline waters of the Arabian
  Sea, which occurred due to the seismic movement of Earth which took
  place at the end of the fourth pluvial period of the southern
  terrestrial globe in about 10,000 B.C. As a result of this seismic
  movement, a strip of the sea-bottom from the mouth of the Tapti river
  in the North to Kanyakumari in the South, along with the adjacent area
  of the Deccan trap closest to the sea, was elevated above the sea
  waters. This elevation resulted in the Sahyadri and Nilgiri ranges.
  The bottom of the sea rose near the trap-border about 600 m above the
  mean sea-level.”</em><a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Dhume substantiates this contention by quoting Dr Gerhard Oertel, a
  German citizen and professor of Geology at Pomona College, Claremont,
  California in the USA. Oertel headed a commission set up by the
  Portuguese government, consisting of mining engineers and geologists,
  to study the mineral occurrences and geology of the territory of Goa.
  He worked from December 1953 to September 1954 and even wrote a book
  on it, titled ‘<em>Geologia de Goa</em>’. However he could not visit
  the northern portion of Sattari and north-eastern part of Pernem, due
  to the liberation movement going on in this area.</p>
  <p>Dhume also quotes Dr Darashaw Nosherwan Wadia (regarded as the
  Father of Indian Geology), zoologists EL Jordan and Dr PS Verma as
  well as several other experts to support his claim.</p>
  <p>However, Dhume does believe that Parashuram was a historic figure,
  rather than a legendary or mythical figure. He dates him back to 2400
  BCE, and not 10,000 BCE, when a conflict had taken place between the
  Haihayas (clans ruling in western and central India) and the Brahmins.
  “<em>The origin of the legend of Parashurama is traced back to the
  aborigines who transmitted it to new-settlers,</em>” he states.<a
  href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  <p>Pereira, who was also an eminent Leftist trade union leader of Goa,
  concludes the whole controversy in this manner:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“<em>From the above discussion, it can be stated that the Gaud
  Saraswat Brahmins are late-comers in Goa and their existence cannot be
  traced earlier than 1000 A.D. In the ‘Gada Parva’ of the Mahabharata,
  it is stated that Saraswat, a son of Rishi Dadichi, who lived on the
  banks of river Saraswati (probably Sarsuti near Thaneshwar in the
  Punjab), gave shelter and fed some sixty-thousand (Satsahastra) Aryan
  Brahmins; they came to him when there was a ravaging famine in
  Northern India for twelve years; they were fed on the fish diet
  obtained from the river Saraswati.</em></p>
  <p><em>Subsequently, with the Aryan colonisation of Northern India,
  the Saraswat Brahmins spread themselves and settled in Siad,
  Rajputana, Bengal (Gaur) and other regions. And it is from Tirhut that
  the Brahmin Parashurama brought them to Goa. It may be inferred that
  they were named Saraswat after the river Saraswati and Gaud after
  their original abode at Tirhut in Gaur (Bengal).</em></p>
  <p><em>The next immigration to Goa by these Saraswat Brahmins took
  place later on (in about the 10th century?) when they came from
  Kannauj. ‘Mangesh Mahatmaya’ relates that they were led by Devasarma,
  Lamasarma and Shivasarma on their way to Rameshwaram. They were so
  much attracted by the beauty of the place, on their halt at Goa, that
  they gave up the idea of proceeding further to their holy destination
  and settled at Kushasthali (modern Cortalim) and Keloshi (modern
  Quelossim). God Mangesh (Mangarisa) and Goddess Shanta Durga were
  brought by them and adored in the two villages. After the conquest of
  Goa by the Portuguese, God Mangesh and Goddess Shanta Durga were
  removed to a safer place in Ponda taluka where they still exist in two
  temples.</em>”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Even today in the 21st century, has the situation changed? People
  from all over the world visit Goa as tourists, fall in love with the
  place and decide to settle down by either buying a small flat or a
  piece of land to build a palatial house. Precisely due to this, from
  that ancient time to now, land in Goa has become the most significant
  component of the Goan economy, around which the politics of Goa
  moves.</p>
  <h2 id="who-were-the-first-settlers">Who Were the First Settlers?</h2>
  <p>The question thus remains: Who were the first settlers of Goa, whom
  did the land belong to, and how did the feudal system evolve – with
  Bhatkar and Kull or Mundkar? How did the Gaunkari evolve into the land
  holdings by the Communidades? Only history can tell us the truth,
  provided we dig out the real truth and the real history. Not the
  ruler-centric history written by the rulers but by the ruled-centric,
  excavated by historians, sociologists, and researchers, based on
  ground realities. Gerard Pereira aptly says:<a href="#fn6"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“History is not made by a few rulers and kings, nor should it
  mean just their so-called great feasts and achievements. History is
  made by the people − the Gavdas, Kunbis and the poor peasants who
  tilled the land and helped the advancement of the mode of production
  from the days of early mankind. The common people create history in
  the course of struggle for existence. Naturally, the clash continues
  permanently between the rulers and the ruled.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The subsequent and consistent digging of history by the historians
  and archaeologists has gone back to 10,000 BCE when the first
  settlement was found in Goa, of hunter-gatherers. Scientific studies
  conducted by experts provide us with a detailed scenario :<a
  href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“<em>Until 1993 the existence of humans in Goa during the
  Paleolithic and Mesolithic period was highly debated. The discovery of
  rock art engravings on lateritic platforms and granite boulders from
  Usgalimal, on the banks of west-flowing river Kushavati River, has
  shed light on the prehistory of Goa. This site was discovered by Dr P
  P Shirodkar, then heading the Archaeology Department of Government of
  Goa. It was subsequently studied by the National Institute of
  Oceanography based in Goa. More than 125 forms were found scattered on
  the banks of river Kushavati in south-eastern Goa. For hundreds of
  years, the Kushavati rock art of Goa was known locally as ‘Gorava
  Rakhnyachi Chitram’, or pictures made by cowherds. After thorough
  study of these forms, scholars have concluded that these petroglyphs
  differ from those found elsewhere in Goa.</em></p>
  <p><em>The rock shelter at Usgalimal has enough space for 25 to 30
  people. The perennial stream in the vicinity which might have served
  Stone Age man for centuries as a source of water. Exploration of
  several Mesolithic sites of the Mandovi-Zuari basin, at other sites
  such as Keri, Thane, Anjuna, Mauxim, Kazur in Quepem, Virdi, has led
  to the discovery of several scrapers, points, bores, cones, etc. A
  hand axe has also been found at Usgalimal. Further unifacial choppers
  were recovered on a flat-based pebble of quartzite from a pebble
  conglomerate at Shigaon on the Dudhsagar River. Evidence of
  Palaeolithic cave existence can be seen at Dabolim, Adkon, Shigaon,
  Fatorpa, Arli, Maulinguinim, Diwar, Sanguem, Pilerne, Aquem-Madgao
  etc.</em></p>
  <p><em>On the basis of recent DNA-based work on human migration, Dr.
  Nandkumar Kamat has ruled out the possibility of Kushavati shamans
  belonging to the first wave of humans to arrive in Goa. They were not
  negritoes or austrics. Most probably they were the earliest
  Mediterraneans who had descended the Western Ghats, probably in their
  search for sea salt on Goa’s coast. As the Kushavati transitioned into
  a Neolithic society, they began the domestication of animals and were
  in the last phase of using stone tools. The entire realm of shamanism
  underwent a radical transition. Today evidence of the metamorphosis in
  the masked dance drama ‘Perni Jagor’ can be seen in the same cultural
  region.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>No evidence however is found till date whether these
  hunter-gatherers finally settled down in Goa.</p>
  <h2 id="mundari-kol-asura"><em>Mundari, Kol, Asura</em></h2>
  <p>According to Dhume, while the Konkan coast was created due to
  seismic movement 10000 BCE, the pluvial rains continued, though with
  diminishing intensity, for one thousand years:<a href="#fn8"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“During this period mud and salt of marine origin continued to
  be de-salted and the process of cohesion started and continued
  slowly... By 9000 BC, the pluvial rains suddenly stopped and the
  climate became very hot and completely dry. Soon after came the high
  winds from the West to the East. The influence of these cyclones
  impacted some areas of the west coast from Britain to India, and even
  Iran and other countries of the terrestrial globe, except China. Due
  to these cyclones, trees were uprooted and large areas were inundated
  with hot silt and sand, sometimes remaíníng on basalt rock covered
  with the powder of basalt-schist, under pressure, and thus were
  fossilized in caverns.</em></p>
  <p><em>With habitats disrupted by the sudden environmental impacts,
  people had to search for a safe shelter. The cyclones generally
  damaged the tops of mountains, but even low lying areas suffered with
  the deposits of hot silt and sand up to a great height. This situation
  probably continued for about 500 years in the west coast of India. And
  after the cessation of this calamity, and with regular seasonal rains,
  the surviving population continued their migration through the foot of
  mountains as well as by spreading out to the west up to the sea-shore.
  From around 5000 B.C. security among settlements in Goa was more or
  less assured.</em></p>
  <p><em>During the period when man dwelled in caverns, there was
  scarcity of food and so there was increased mortality. Now the
  conditions changed. The population gradually increased and people
  wandered here and there in small groups in search of food and sweet
  water. Even these groups did not try to settle permanently. They were
  forced to frequently change their dwellings in search of edible roots,
  wild fruit and gram. The population grew, and as such new sites were
  selected for settlements. Simultaneously, by natural instinct
  especially among the women folk, they practised rudimentary
  agriculture, cultivating wild grain and fruit and preparing
  mud-vessels for storing the grain.</em></p>
  <p><em>The people from North as well as the South came to occupy the
  new-born area starting from the western foot of the Sahyadri and
  Nilgiri ranges. The human folk which first established themselves in
  Goa are those that came from the foothills of the Sahyadri range. They
  were named by the newcomers (in the <em>Mundari</em> language) from
  North India as Mhars, meaning “of the eldest house” or say the most
  ancient settlers. The Mhars did not hunt because they had no
  implements. So their food was only that which was produced
  spontaneously. They ate flesh but only of the beasts already dead.
  Kills with stone were rare. They worshipped only the dead ancestors,
  believing in the existence of spirits.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The next migration, according to Dhume, was in 4000 BCE, of a
  buffalo-rearing pastoral tribe from South India. They followed a
  matrilineal system. They had knowledge of domestication of animals and
  after centuries were eventually divided into two groups, the
  <em>Naik</em> caste and a second group of the matriarchal system
  consisting of <em>Chedvans</em>, <em>Bhavins</em> and
  <em>Kalavants</em> and their brothers.</p>
  <p>By 3500 BCE there migrated another tribe called the <em>Asura</em>,
  from the northern area around Chota-Nagpur, a plateau of around 65,000
  square kilometres in eastern India. It covers much of today’s
  Jharkhand state as well as adjacent parts of Bihar, Odisha, West
  Bengal, and Chhattisgarh. They started agriculture by the cut-and-burn
  method, locally known as the <em>Kumeri</em> system and produced
  cereals. The <em>Kumeri</em> system of shifting agriculture continues
  till date.</p>
  <p>They were later subdued by the subsequent <em>Kol</em> tribe who
  dispossessed them of their land. For livelihood, they shifted to other
  professions like black-smiths, potters, and even landless labourers
  while some formed part of the Vani caste. The Bharvankar caste in the
  Christian community is of this stock.</p>
  <p>The next migration Goa witnessed was in 3000 BCE (5000 years ago)
  of <em>Kols</em>, <em>Mundaris</em>, and <em>Kharwas</em>, from the
  same area as the <em>Asuras</em>. The <em>Kols</em> occupied the
  lands, cultivated paddyfields and organised a village-socio-economic
  administration, establishing a ‘<em>Barazan</em>’, that is a group
  generally formed of twelve hamlets of villages. Their main goddess was
  <em>Roinn</em>, the anthill, which was later named as <em>Santer</em>.
  They were later called <em>Santerkar</em>, which then got renamed as
  <em>Satarkar</em>. Being primarily a <em>Kullwadi</em> caste, Dhume
  divides <em>Satarkars</em> into two categories: (1) <em>Satarkars</em>
  of Ponda taluka and Rivona village in Sanguem (a small settlement is
  also found in Loliem village of Canacona - Author) and (2)
  <em>Satarkar</em>, a lower Maratha caste in Sanguem, Sattari,
  Bicholim, and Pernem talukas.</p>
  <p>The <em>Mundaris</em>, who probably came after the <em>Kols</em>,
  worked under their hegemony. They had no special cultural features,
  except for the worship of a forest-tree named <em>Kel</em>. The
  <em>Munda</em> tribe enjoyed the highest status among all the tribes
  such as <em>Kols</em>, <em>Hos</em> (<em>Larka Kols</em>),
  <em>Santals</em>, <em>Bhumija</em>, <em>Korwars</em>, <em>Juang</em>,
  <em>Birhor</em>, <em>Asuras</em> and so on. The word <em>Mundkar</em>,
  meaning ‘protector’ of property, is derived from this <em>Mundari</em>
  word.</p>
  <p>According to Dhume, the Gavddo tribe belongs to two different
  settlements. One belongs to the <em>Asur-Munda</em> tribe, which came
  from Chota Nagpur. The Satarkars, originally from Advai village of
  Sattari, shifted to Savoi-Verem (for reasons not known), defeated the
  <em>Gavdde</em> there and established their settlement. These
  <em>Gavdde</em> must have then settled elsewhere in Goa.</p>
  <p>The second tribe migrated along with the Goud Saraswat Brahmins
  from Kannauj (Uttar Pradesh) and established themselves at Kutthali
  (Cortalim). They are called <em>Kelshi- Kutthalkar Gaudde.</em> They
  are believed to have developed the Khazan lands in Madkai, across the
  Zuari river.</p>
  <p>According to Dhume, <em>Kullambi</em> is originally not a caste or
  tribe, but the cultivating class. It represents the professional
  status of different ethnic groups of lower status in Goan society
  whose main means of substance was agriculture. Who are these
  Kullambis? The Christian Gaudde from Salcete, the Christian Bharvankar
  Gaudde from Salcete and Quepem, the Velips and Gaonkars of Sanguem and
  Canacona as well as Konkani <em>Kunbis</em> who migrated to North
  Canara. All these settlements have their <em>Mhal</em> leader, who is
  called <em>Gaonkar</em>.</p>
  <p>The <em>Kharwis</em> came probably along with the
  <em>Mundaris</em>, but there is no proof for their independent
  settlement in village form. They took to the profession of fishing and
  boating and formed the present <em>Kharvi</em> (fishermen)
  community.</p>
  <h2 id="aryans-the-latecomers">Aryans, the Latecomers</h2>
  <p>The advent of the Aryans began around 2400 BCE, almost six to seven
  centuries after the first settlement arrived in Goa in 9000 BCE. It
  was the end of the Rigvedic age and the Aryans from the Indus valley
  were highly influenced by it. The Indus Valley civilisation was the
  most widespread, its sites spanning an area stretching from today’s
  northeast Afghanistan (Gandhar), through much of Pakistan (most of the
  Sindhu Pradesh), and into western and north-western India. The tale of
  Parashuram is connected with the first phase of migration of Goud
  Saraswat Brahmins − Bhargavas and Angiras, especially in Salcete,
  Tiswadi, and Bardez talukas.</p>
  <p>They lived in a joint family and the patriarch had full powers over
  the members of the family. He was almost like a king. His jurisdiction
  expanded as the joint family expanded into a large federation of
  several natural families springing from a common ancestor, living in
  the same village. This system is found to be prevalent among all the
  Indo-European communities, which establishes the fact of where the
  first wave of Aryans came from.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
  <p>They were not nomads. They lived a settled life and built cottages
  of wood and thatch for their dwellings. Milk and its products were the
  most important part of their food, besides cakes of rice or barley,
  porridge, as well as meats of goats and sheep which were sacrificed.
  The cow was considered to be sacred and could not be killed. They did
  not interfere with the life, religion, customs, festivities, or even
  the Barazan system of the earlier settlers. But they obviously held
  sway over the others because of their superiority in attack and
  defence strategies. They knew how to make swords, helmets,
  hand-guards, armour, etc. of steel.</p>
  <p>This immigration from the North continued. References of more
  migrations of Havig Brahmins are found during the Kadamba regime in
  the fourth to sixth century and Madhvacharya’s sect in the 13th
  century.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> Later, during religious
  conversions by the Portuguese, these Brahmins also migrated outside
  Goa, especially to Karnataka and Kerala.</p>
  <p>The second wave of Aryan migration occurred around 700 CE when the
  entire bed of the Saraswati river of a length of about 1500 kilometres
  supposedly disappeared and the people along its banks suffered a
  severe drought. This led to the migration of Aryans as well as
  non-Aryans to various parts of India.</p>
  <p>Since the river Saraswati is mentioned only in the Rigveda, experts
  have been debating over its exact location. It is believed that the
  river originated in the high Himalayas and descended to the plains in
  Haryana, Punjab, adjoining parts of Pakistan and joined the Arabian
  sea at Rann of Kutch in Gujarat. Some geologists claim that the
  Saraswati could have been a major all-season river in the Indus-Yamuna
  interfluve. Claims are also made that it has remained as the
  Ghaggar-Hakra intermittent river between India and Pakistan, which
  flows only in the monsoons and ends at the Thar desert. There are also
  counter-claims made that the river never existed and that all this is
  just myth.<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
  <p>India’s eminent historian Romila Thapar does not dispute that the
  Saraswati river existed, but refuses to buy the argument that it is
  the Ghaggar:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“<em>The identification of the Ghaggar with the Sarasvati,
  mentioned in the Rig-Veda, is controversial. Furthermore, the early
  references to Sarasvati could be to the Haraxvati Plain in
  Afghanistan… This has led to the theory that originally the Old
  Iranian and Indo-Aryan speakers were a single group but dissensions
  led to their splitting up. It was then that the Indo- Aryan speakers
  living in the Indo-Iranian borderlands and the Haraxvati (Sarasvati)
  area of Afghanistan gradually migrated to the Indus plain, bringing
  with them their language, rituals and social customs, to settle as
  agro-pastoralists in the Sapta- Sindhu.</em>”<a href="#fn12"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The second wave of Aryans in Goa consisted of Saraswat Brahmins,
  Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and even Gaudde. The Saraswat Brahmins were from
  Kosala in Chattisgarh as well as from Chedi. The Bhoja Kshatriyas were
  from Ujjain and Chediyas from the Chedi kingdom, from Bundelkhand,
  both from Madhya Pradesh. Besides Vaishyas, the families also
  consisted of artisans and of non-Aryan stock from Goud, known in Goa
  as Gaudde. They came by the road route, from Mathura and Ujjain, and
  then to the South by western coast to Laat in Gujarat to Goa. Some
  Saraswat Brahmins, who had taken up trade in Laat in Gujarat, came by
  sea later in 700 CE and joined them in Goa to settle down.<a
  href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The Kshatriya-Bhojas and Chediyas, named together as Chaddes,
  expelled the Satarkars who fled to the south up to the village of
  Rivona in Sanguem taluka and occupied the villages and established
  their headquarters at Amonem village. They however kept the
  <em>Mundari</em> tribe as well as other families of the original
  pastoral tribe in their service. They established the system of
  kingship under the hegemony of the Bhojas, which is the first kingship
  to appear in the area of Goa in about 600 B.C. However, the village
  administration system of adjacent Salcete taluka was adopted with
  slight modifications. In the beginning of the occupation the three
  main clans held common ownership of the land and cooperative farming
  was practiced, the net income being equally distributed among those
  three sub-groups. But later on, the lands were distributed among those
  three memberclans, while the forest and pasture lands, village wise,
  were kept under common ownership.</em></p>
  <p><em>The areas of Kudal and later on of Pedne and Bardez talukas
  were occupied by the families of the second wave of Aryans consisting
  of Saraswats, who had arrived there by the land route. They continued
  with the system of private ownership of the lands. Later, around the
  beginning of the Christian Era, the people from Deccan Plateau
  appeared and settled there and entered the local administration.
  However, there is no clear evidence as to whether these people gained
  hegemony or equal status as compared to the Brahmins who had settled
  earlier.</em></p>
  <p><em>In Sattari taluka, the people from the Deccan Plateau came from
  the Western Ghats, about the beginning of the Christian Era. They
  entered through Rivem village, attacked the Satarkars who had occupied
  that area and expelled them… The expansion of these people continued
  in the Hemadbarcem division of Sanguem taluka (now in Dharbandora
  taluka) and in a part of Bicholim (Dichol) taluka. As occupation
  progressed, the ruler brought families of his matrimonial relations
  from their original home and established headquarters at Surla of
  Sanguem and Kudnem of Bicholim (Dichol) talukas.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <h2 id="game-changer-iraqi-sumerians">Game-Changer Iraqi
  Sumerians</h2>
  <p>In between the first and second migration of Aryans, there was a
  significant migration around 2000 BCE from Sumer, which is today part
  of Iraq. Why were the Sumerians so significant? It is because the
  world’s first civilisation had been created in Mesopotamia under the
  Sumerian leadership. They were a highly knowledgeable tribe among
  those who had settled in Goa in terms of weapons, housing, cuisine,
  and all other facets of community living. They were into trade with
  Egypt and India, including Goa, of gold, cedar, and copper. They knew
  about the location as well as the environment and facilities for
  settlement in Goa. Through the Persian Gulf, the sea route took them
  about three years to reach Goa.</p>
  <p>Though proficient in agricultural activity, a famine hit them very
  badly, which compelled them to migrate. History says that about 2,000
  B.C, “the civilisation of Sumer had been kindled there, sparks had
  leapt to Egypt and India.” Anant Sinai Dhume is perhaps the first
  person who proved this migration with various kinds of evidence that
  indicate Sumerian settlement in those cities.</p>
  <p>Who were these Sumerians settled in Goa almost 4000 years ago?
  Mainly the Padhye Brahmins, and also quite a few of the smith class:<a
  href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“All the people who migrated from Sumer could not have
  sheltered in Goa, so that people travelled to the south of Goa by the
  sea-route. It appears that the families of the highest class, Paddyas,
  settled in Goa and persistently maintained their customs whereas the
  families of other classes, mainly artisans and craftsmen and perhaps
  some families of the highest caste travelled to the south (India)
  where they might have amalgamated their customs with those of the
  original settlers of these areas.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>But then where did the name Paddya or Padhye originate from? Dhume
  links it to one of the Sumerian kings, whose name was A-an-ni-pad-da.
  Being from the highest class among all, they called themselves Paddye.
  <em>“And similarly, with slight deviation, the families of lower class
  named themselves ‘Fatto’ and another family as ‘Maddo’. This last
  family settled in the area now known as Marcaim (Madkai) which is
  probably a version of Maddaki, as the word ‘ki’ means land in the
  Sumerian language.”</em> They came from the city of Ur, situated on
  the shores of Persian Gulf, from which Dhume feels the name of a
  village in Ponda taluka − Orgao − could have been derived.</p>
  <p>Their first settlements were in three talukas − Ponda, Bardez, and
  Salcete. Even today the highest number of Padhye Brahmins are found in
  Ponda taluka. In Bardez, they settled in Serula and Betim-Verem and in
  Varca village of Salcete taluka.</p>
  <p>The migration of the Sumerians brought changes in the thinking
  process of even the first wave of Aryans, who began to follow their
  customs. Their culture is deeply rooted in Goa today, perhaps because
  it was a dominant ruler-priest class. They brought the concept of a
  permanent structure for God − a temple − in Goa. As in the Sumerian
  system, in the sanctum (garbh kood) of a temple, only the Bhat and the
  Mahajans, who founded the temple, are allowed. The institution of
  Devadasi system (dancing girls, temple servants, etc.) was also
  brought to Goa by the Sumerians.</p>
  <p>The most interesting elements are that of agriculture and land
  management. The Padhyes introduced a special type of ploughshare made
  of iron, and were skilled in reclaiming river land, constructing
  dykes, and using land for cultivation. They were pioneers in shaping
  the early methods of cultivation, with irrigation management and
  modern ploughing tools. Even today, the Padhye Brahmins are considered
  to be the most progressive farmers in Goa. They are also the real
  models for the co-operative management of the agricultural economy, by
  adapting the Gaunkari system to the changing modern times. The classic
  example of this is the Goa Bagayatdar Sahakari Kharedi- Vikri Sanstha.
  From buying and selling agricultural products at the optimum price and
  providing all the agricultural tools, implements as well as
  fertilisers and pesticides, the Bagayatdar today runs Goa’s best
  supermarkets for the Goan consumer at a minimum possible price.</p>
  <p>It was a tribal concept that land belonged to the whole community
  and its deity. Land belonging to the king was an Aryan concept. And
  land belonging to the village god or goddess was a Sumerian concept.
  The early settlers of Goa, the tribals, developed a Gaunkari system
  for the management of cultivable land. They cultivated collectively
  but appropriated the cultivated produce individually. Administration
  of the whole village was also run by the assembly of elders. The
  Sumerians (or the Padhye Brahmins), to a large extent, transferred
  this authority to the local temple and its managers. They introduced
  the concept of collective farming, through this authority, with all
  the obligations of maintenance and repairs of dykes and irrigation
  systems placed upon the cultivators. The templepalace played a crucial
  role in mediating the relationships and disputes between farmers,
  herdsmen, fishermen, craftspecialists, and the State.</p>
  <p>The Sumerians built temples in Goa. Houses were typically built
  with an entrance room, an open courtyard, verandah, passages from one
  room to the other rooms, kitchen, etc. They also devised the
  irrigation system, dug up canals, and maintained them to prevent
  silting. A lot of labour was engaged in all these activities. Perhaps
  this was the first major construction activity that had taken place in
  Goa. And for this, the construction labour was imported. This labour
  class also settled in Goa and became Goans − our ancestors!</p>
  <p>The Padhye Brahmins are quite different from the Saraswat Brahmins
  in terms of the agricultural relations they maintain with the farmers,
  tenants, and even the landless agricultural labour. They personally
  work in the fields and hold dignity of labour in their social
  approach. Also, the Gauda and Kunbi-Velip communities have immense
  respect for the Padhye Brahmins as compared to the Saraswat Brahmins
  with ‘bhatkar’ mentality.</p>
  <p>Perhaps this is the reason Sudin Dhavalikar is unbeatable in
  Madkai, which has a sizable vote bank of Gawda community. His brother
  Deepak also rides this ancestral legacy in the tribal dominated Priol
  constituency. This could be the reason why the Bhahujan Samaj feels
  quite comfortable when he heads a party like the MGP.</p>
  <p>Ajit Painginkar, a veteran journalist from Canacona and a
  researcher of folk art, tells me that the Kunbi-Velip community even
  in his taluka is found to be more connected with the Padhey Brahmins
  than the other communities. Both the communities, even three decades
  ago, had lots of similarities in terms of the hard work they put in,
  their involvement in agriculture, their lifestyle and even the attire
  including the <em>chenchi</em> (a pouch with a string to sling it
  around the shoulder) of paan-tambakhu (tobacco paan). Both the
  communities are also staunch temple devotees.</p>
  <p>While both these communities developed the Gaunkari system of
  community farming together, they imported the construction labour from
  other parts of the country, who are now settled in Goa. It is a
  similar situation to what we witness in Goa today where the labour
  class is imported from other parts of the country and they too are
  slowly settling down in Goa. The cultural confrontation between the
  insiders and outsiders remains for one or two generations after which
  they also become Niz Goenkar, like how our ancestors became and
  started calling ourselves “Original Goans”.</p>
  <p>Goans were confronted with a major controversy when the BJP
  government, in 2021, introduced a Bhumiputra bill. The debate led to
  who is the Bhumiputra and who is an outsider migrant. From the ancient
  history before any dynasty started ruling Goa, can we define who is a
  Bhumiputra and who is an outsider? Is migration a modern phenomenon?
  Or is the history of Goa full of migrations, from all over the world
  as well as different parts of India? What are we originally? Iraqis?
  Afghanis? Pakistani? Indo-Europeans? Aryans? Dravidians? Bengalis?
  Odiyas? Jharkhandi? Bihari? Madhya Pradeshi? Chattisgarhi? Gujarati?
  <em>Mundaris</em>? <em>Kol</em>? Sumerians? Arabs?</p>
  <p>If we analyse this history, we find that different tribes came down
  and settled in Goa in different centuries. And here Goa’s politics has
  started moving around a migration, which is not even one century old.
  1961 to 2021 is the tail end of the 20th century and the early
  beginning of the 21st century. The history of barely 60 years!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
  role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Wikipedia: Parshurama<a
  href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>गायतोंडे व्याकरणाचार्य गजानन
  शास्त्री: सह्याद्री खंड<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>Pereira Gerard A: An outline of
  pre-Portuguese History of Goa<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sinai Dhume Anant R: The Cultural
  History of Goa, From 10000 BC - 12352 AD. P 334<a href="#fnref4"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>ibid P 26<a href="#fnref5"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>Pereira Gerald A: An Outline of
  Pre-Portuguese History of Goa<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>Wikipedia: History of Goa<a
  href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sinai Dhume Anant R: The Cultural
  History of Goa, From 10000 BC - 12352 AD. P 334-336<a href="#fnref8"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sinai Dhume Anant R: The Cultural
  History of Goa, From 10000 BC - 12352 AD. P 173<a href="#fnref9"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Ibid P 179<a href="#fnref10"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>Wikipedia: Ghaggar-Hakra river<a
  href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>Thapar Romila: The Penguin History
  of Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300<a href="#fnref12"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sinai Dhume Anant R: The Cultural
  History of Goa, From 10000 BC - 12352 AD. P 178-179<a href="#fnref13"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>Sinai Dhume Anant R: The Cultural
  History of Goa, From 10000 BC - 12352 AD. P 116-167<a href="#fnref14"
  class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
