<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: Begins the Bahujan Era</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/fonts/fonts.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-11">Chapter 11</h3>
  <h1 id="begins-the-bahujan-era">BEGINS THE <em>BAHUJAN</em> ERA</h1>
  <p>12 December 1963. Bhausaheb Bandodkar was nowhere in the forefront
  while the MGP and UGP camps were rejoicing over their victories in
  Goa. He was not even in Goa. He was resting at his Dadar flat in
  Bombay and listening to the news on Goa’s election on the radio, in
  the company of Jayantrao Tilak, Shashikant Narvekar, Ramdas
  Prabhugaonkar, Principal Venkatesh Narayan Naik and others. Overjoyed
  with the unexpected result, Bhau said:</p>
  <p>“<em>Now we have to think about who will be the Chief
  Minister.</em>”</p>
  <p>“<em>No need to think. You will be the Chief Minister of Goa,</em>”
  replied Jayantrao Tilak.</p>
  <p>Bhau was dumbfounded on hearing this. The others instantly
  supported Tilak’s words.</p>
  <p>“<em>How is that possible? I am not even elected,</em>” said
  Bandodkar.</p>
  <p>Bhau was then told that the Constitution of India allows any Indian
  citizen to become a chief minister or minister, provided he or she
  gets elected within six months, for which one legislator would have to
  step down to create a vacancy for a by-election.<a href="#fn1"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
  Bhau was not convinced. He went to meet his friend Vasantrao Naik, who
  by then had become the CM of Maharashtra. He too echoed the same
  opinion, adding to Bhau’s confusion. Meanwhile, Nath Pai in Delhi met
  Prime Minister Pandit Nehru, Defence Minister Y B Chavan and Union
  Home Minister Gulzarilal Nanda, conveying to them that the people of
  Goa had voted in favour of Goa’s merger.</p>
  <p>The next day was a very hectic one in Goa as well as in Bombay.
  Nath Pai immediately flew down to Bombay, met other leaders like Madhu
  Dandavate along with Bandodkar and also spoke to the media. Bandodkar,
  as the MGP President, told the media that he would be happy if Goa was
  immediately merged into Maharashtra. However, since it would not
  happen immediately, the MGP would not shirk from its responsibility to
  form the government in Goa. The leader would be elected in Goa by
  evening. Nath Pai announced that the MGP government would have a
  three-member cabinet.</p>
  <p>Bhau also gave financial justification as to why Goa should not
  continue as a Union Territory. According to him, the central
  government would be spending four crore rupees on the administration
  of an area with a population of only six lakhs. Contrary to this,
  Ratnagiri district in the Konkan, which was three times more populated
  than Goa, was managed with only Rs 50 lakhs.<a href="#fn2"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
  <p>Immediately both of them, along with Shivraj Patil, flew down to
  Goa to address a public rally to celebrate the victory in Panaji.
  Around 10,000 people had gathered late evening, with a huge
  participation of women. South Goa MP Mukund Shinkre said at the rally
  that the MGP victory had strengthened the hands of Pandit Nehru. Tony
  Fernandes said the results had proved that the MGP was not a communal
  party. He was elected from Hindu-dominated Sanguem, Shinkre from the
  Christian-dominated South and Peter Alvares from Hindu-dominated North
  Goa. Late at night, the MGP legislature party elected Bandodkar as
  their leader, to take over as Goa’s first chief minister.<a
  href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
  <p>There are two different tales of how Bhau’s name was proposed in
  the first legislature party meeting held to elect the leader. One tale
  claims that Shambhu Palienkar proposed that P P Shirodkar be elected
  the leader and made the chief minister. Kusumakar Kadkade seconded it.
  At this juncture, Nath Pai entered the room and proposed that
  Bandodkar be made the CM, informing them of what had been discussed in
  Bombay.</p>
  <p>The second tale is more significant. According to M S Prabhu,
  Mukund Shinkre was supposed to propose Bandodkar’s name. As he
  remained quiet, Prabhu himself proposed Bandodkar’s name. He opposed
  Shirodkar becoming the CM, as the MGP needed a non-controversial
  leader. Shirodkar had made a public statement that if the MGP came to
  power, women from Saraswat Brahmin families would have to wash
  utensils at the houses of the Bahujan Samaj. Shirodkar denied this
  story, as well as making such a public statement. What is more
  significant is that at that moment, the MGP did not want to antagonise
  the Saraswat Brahmin community but wanted to take everybody
  together.<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
  <p>The media was later told that Bhau was elected the leader
  unanimously, with P P Shirodkar proposing his name. The meeting was
  presided over by Nath Pai. Technically, it was a hung Assembly since
  the largest single party − the MGP − had only 14 seats in the
  30-member House. But besides the twomember PSP who had a pre-poll
  alliance with the MGP, the MLAs of Daman and Diu were also supporting
  the MGP, raising the strength to 18. Kalidas Patel, Daman MLA of
  Congress, wanted his region to be merged into Surat district while
  Mamadali Ravji, Independent MLA of Diu, wanted to merge with
  Saurashtra.<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  <h2 id="the-bahujan-formula">The Bahujan Formula</h2>
  <p>The MGP also announced a six-point agenda for governance. ‘Land to
  the Tiller’ was the topmost priority:</p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li>To give relief to the tenants and mundkars by introducing, as soon
  as possible, the tenancy and similar agrarian legislations</li>
  <li>To provide as many medical amenities as possible particularly in
  the rural areas</li>
  <li>To provide better road communications, particularly in the rural
  areas</li>
  <li>To ensure that the Gram Panchayats function effectively and
  efficiently</li>
  <li>To remove all possible obstructions in the way of the Gram
  Panchayats</li>
  <li>To rehabilitate the political sufferers as fast as possible.<a
  href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></li>
  </ol>
  <p>Bhau, along with Tony Fernandes and ViSu Karmali, were sworn in on
  20 December, the day after the third anniversary of Goa’s Liberation.
  Vice President Dr Zakir Hussain specially flew down from Delhi to
  preside over the swearing-in ceremony at the Raj Bhavan. Bhau’s
  three-member cabinet with a Christian and a Brahmin corresponded with
  his firm belief which he had expressed while founding the party. There
  was to be no antagonism towards any caste or religion, including the
  upper caste, but there would be no compromise on land reforms. He had
  replicated the Bahujan formula which Y B Chavan had followed in
  Maharashtra.</p>
  <p>Bhau’s next cabinet in 1967, after the Opinion Poll, was also three
  plus one. Besides Bhau, freedom fighter Anthony D’Souza and
  educationist Gopalrao Mayekar were the cabinet ministers. Atchutrao
  Usgaonkar was made the minister of state. This was the moment when
  ViSu Karmali went into depression, as he felt Bhau had not reposed
  similar trust in him, and committed suicide at a Bombay guest house on
  2 September 1967. K B Naik entered here as the leader of the majority
  Bhandari Samaj by getting elected at the by-election to fill Karmali’s
  seat. Later, he led a revolt against Bhau when both D’Souza and
  Mayekar resigned from the ministry. Bhau’s third ministry in 1972
  included Atchutrao Usgaonkar and Pratapsingh Rane as the cabinet
  ministers and Shashikala Kakodkar as the minister of state.</p>
  <p>A little before his sudden demise in 1973, Bhau had finalised the
  plan to merge the MGP into Congress. Uma Shankar Dixit, the
  influential union minister in the Indira government, had succeeded in
  mediating the merger. He had agreed to all the three major conditions
  laid down by Bandodkar, based on his Bahujan Formula: 1) Elections of
  the Congress party would be held as per the advice of Bandodkar; 2)
  Maximum candidates of the Congress should come from the Bahujan Samaj;
  and 3) Christians must have representation in the cabinet.<a
  href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <p>Later on Shashikala-tai, when she took over the reins after Bhau’s
  demise, continued with the formula. And it was also followed by
  Pratapsingh Rane later as the Congress chief minister. The Bahujan
  formula continues to be followed in Goa till date, no matter which
  party forms the government − the MGP, the Congress, the BJP or any
  splinter groups of defectors.</p>
  <p>Perhaps this is also another reason why the BJP did not go ahead
  with hard Hindutva in Goa, and then even soft Hindutva got converted
  to “appeasing the minorities”.</p>
  <p>The Congress could come to power only when the party adopted the
  Bahujan formula with the MGP and UGP leaders shaking hands under one
  umbrella. With this formula, the Congress ruled for a decade
  uninterruptedly till 1990. And precisely because of this formula, it
  continues to be the prime political force even after defections have
  become the order of the day. The BJP too could come to power only when
  it had conquered the hearts of the Christians, besides the Hindu
  Bahujan Samaj.</p>
  <p>Riding on the wave of the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi issue, when
  in 1994 the BJP made its debut in the Assembly with four MLAs, it had
  given a ticket to only Anthony Fernandes in Cortalim out of the total
  12 seats they contested in alliance with the MGP. When the saffron
  brigade went alone in 1999, the representation to the minorities rose
  to four: Socorro Fernandes (St Cruz), Anthony Fernandes (Cortalim),
  Julio D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina (Navelim) among its 39
  candidates. None of them got elected in either of these elections, but
  the Hindutva party was compelled to follow the Bahujan formula: Hindus
  and Christians including the Brahmins. In fact, in 1994 itself, BJP’s
  four MLAs included two Saraswats − Manohar Parrikar and Digambar
  Kamat.</p>
  <p>By the 2002 election, the BJP had replaced Soft Hindutva with Good
  Governance by increasing the minority representation to nine, with
  Francisco D’Souza among them getting elected from Mapusa. The other
  candidates were Tony Rodrigues (Taleigao), Shaikh Hassan Haroon
  (Mormugao), Anthony Vaz (Cortalim), Jose Pinheiro (Loutolim), Laxmi
  Gonsalves (Benaulim), Julio D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina
  (Navelim). In addition, the party also supported Filipe Neri Rodrigues
  (Velim) to get elected as an Independent MLA.</p>
  <p>In the 2007 election, Francisco D’Souza was re-elected while other
  candidates from among the 33 the BJP fielded were Agnelo Silveira
  (Taleigao), Antonio Caido (St Andre) and Milagres Gonsalves
  (Cuncolim).</p>
  <p>The real turning point however was the 2012 election.</p>
  <p>The Church unofficially supported the BJP to teach a lifetime
  lesson to the corrupt and opportunist Congress, which had been taking
  the Christians for granted. The BJP rose to 21 from among its 28
  candidates, out of which six were Christians: Francisco D’Souza
  (Mapusa), Michael Lobo (Calangute), Glenn Ticlo (Aldona), Carlos
  Almeida (Vasco), Matanhy Saldanha (Cortalim) and Nilesh Cabral
  (Curchorem). The party also supported the Goa Vikas Party, electing
  Mickky Pacheco (Nuvem) and Caitu Silva (Benaulim) as the MLAs. GVP’s
  third candidate Joseph Gonsalves (Quepem) lost. In addition, the
  Hindutva party also got two independents elected from the minorities:
  Avertano Furtado (Navelim) and Benjamin Silva (Velim).</p>
  <p>The trend continued in 2017 election when BJP’s 13 MLAs included
  seven Christians, a majority of minorities: Francisco D’Souza
  (Mapusa), Michael Lobo (Calangute), Glenn Ticlo (Aldona), Carlos
  Almeida (Vasco), Mauvin Godinho (Dabolim), Alina Saldanha (Cortalim)
  and Nilesh Cabral (Curchorem). The party candidate Arthur D’Silva
  (Curtorim) and the independent Avertano Furtado (Navelim) did not
  win.</p>
  <p>Today, after engineering a series of defections to make the BJP
  government ‘stable’, out of 27, more than half − 15 − are Christian
  MLAs.</p>
  <p>Whether it is a government formed by popular mandate, a coalition
  government with other parties, or a defectors’ government, no
  political group can escape this Bahujan formula. Perhaps this is the
  reason caste or religion does not become an issue for a voter while
  electing the candidate, provided the societal balance is maintained in
  the government formation. However, this balance is getting wobbly
  nowadays when governments are either formed in a hung Assembly or
  alternate governments are formed through defections. Parrikar sailed
  comfortably through his 2012 victory. Out of 21, he had six
  legislators from the majority Bhandari community, seven Christians,
  Marathas, Shet, Tribals, and himself a Saraswat Brahmin. Francis
  D’Souza was the deputy chief minister.</p>
  <p>Alliance partner Sudin Dhavalikar was in the third position. Four
  ministers were Bhandaris − Dayanand Mandrekar, Mahadev Naik, Dilip
  Parulekar and Milind Naik. Avertano Furtado and Alina Saldanha were
  also in the cabinet, besides tribal minister Ramesh Tavadkar and
  Rajendra Arlekar elected from an SC constituency sitting in the
  Speaker’s chair.</p>
  <p>This whole combination tumbled when in the 2017 election, the BJP
  slipped down to 13. All the Bhandaris lost except for Milind Naik.
  Tawadkar and Arlekar also lost, and the Christians MLAs became a
  majority. On roping in the MGP, Goa Forward Party and the Independents
  to form the government, the Parrikar cabinet became dominated by
  Saraswat Brahmins and Christians. BJP minister Babu Azgaonkar, who
  later split from the MGP with his colleague Deepak Prabhu Pauskar,
  made a public statement that he was proud that his government was
  being guided by learned Saraswat Brahmins: Parrikar as CM, Sudin
  Dhavalikar of the MGP and Vijai Sardesai of the Goa Forward as the
  deputy CMs and independent Rohan Khanute as an equally influential
  minister.</p>
  <p>This opportunistic formula angered the Bhandari Samaj, through
  which emerged a new executive committee through the most controversial
  election of the Gomantak Bhandari Samaj.</p>
  <p>After the organisational election, senior BJP leader and ex-MLA
  Dayanand Mandrekar blessed the new committee, wishing them “good luck
  in what they have planned”. Meanwhile, after Parrikar’s demise, Dr
  Pramod Sawant took over, dropped the Goa Forward Party members, Rohan
  Khaunte as well as MGP leader Sudin Dhavalikar from the cabinet. The
  other two MGP members crossed over to the BJP. On the other hand, 10
  more members of the Congress also crossed over to the BJP. Babu
  Kavlekar hailing from the Dhangar community and Babu Azgaonkar from
  the SC community became the deputy CMs under ‘Maratha’ CM Dr Sawant.
  He proudly started making public statements that his was truly a
  Bahujan Samaj government.</p>
  <p>But this did not stop the Gomantak Bhandari Samaj from going ahead
  with its political agenda. The GBS has now publicly admitted its
  political intention. Its president Ashok Naik has categorically stated
  that they would support any party that would field maximum candidates
  from their community and make a Bhandari the CM. Falling prey to this
  casteist politics, AAP national Convener Arvind Kejriwal has announced
  that they would have a Bhandari Chief Minister and a Christian Deputy
  CM. The TMC also followed suit by splitting the Goa Forward Party and
  bringing Kiran Kandolkar and his wife into Didi’s camp. The Congress
  on the other hand is in a quandary since the parties it plans to align
  with are headed by upper caste Brahmins, may they be from the MGP or
  the Goa Forward Party. In that sense, Poll 2022 is a testing time for
  Goan politics.</p>
  <p>We need to see if the Goan voters get into ‘national integration
  mode’ by embracing caste politics promoted by national parties during
  polling or prefer the Bahujan Formula devised by Bhausaheb Bandodkar
  of giving equal representation to Goan society while governing the
  state.</p>
  <h2 id="bhau-loves-panditji">Bhau Loves Panditji</h2>
  <p>In the first election, the MGP did not have a separate manifesto.
  The Congress manifesto was the same as the MGP manifesto, except for
  its stand on the immediate merger of Goa into Maharashtra. After the
  MGP victory, the PSP leaders from Maharashtra began to press for Goa’s
  immediate merger.</p>
  <p>Socialist leaders including S M Joshi and N G Goray came down
  heavily on the Congress, calling the party opportunistic and saying
  the Goa verdict was a lesson not to encourage factional elements like
  the UGP.<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> Joining the chorus was the
  seniormost and most respectable Congress leader C Rajgopalachari. In
  the periodical <em>Swarajya</em> he edited, Rajaji hit out at Pandit
  Nehru, alleging that he wanted to keep Goa as ‘streedhan’ for New
  Delhi. Rajaji wanted Pondicherry to merge with Madras and Goa with
  Maharashtra.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
  <p>Nehru dismissed their claim that the Goa verdict was a verdict for
  the merger. He countered it by alleging that the MGP had won the
  election by creating a communal divide. Former Union minister S K
  Patil, originally from Kudal in Konkan, was the only Congress leader
  justifying Nehru’s stand. He argued that it was an election to elect
  the government and not a plebiscite to decide the merger issue. He
  even went a step ahead and said that the Centre would hold a
  plebiscite to decide the issue of Goa’s identity, but after 10
  years.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
  <p>Though Bandodkar was guided throughout this phase by the PSP
  leaders and especially Nath Pai, the elected MGP MPs and MLAs had
  taken an altogether divergent stand on PSP’s attack on the Congress.
  Soon after the election results, the party had two victory rallies, in
  Margao and then in Panaji on 13 December. In both the meetings, MGP MP
  Mukund Shinkre, Sanguem MLA Tony Fernandes and Bandodkar himself
  claimed that the MGP victory meant the strengthening of the hands of
  Pandit Nehru at the Centre.<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> After taking over as
  the legislature party leader to sit on the throne, Bandodkar had a
  lengthy press conference on 17 December. Rather than attacking Nehru
  on his allegations of communal divide, Bandodkar said he was deeply
  pained with Nehru’s remark and suggested that he should find out what
  the reality actually was.</p>
  <p>“I don’t feel this is a defeat of the Indian National Congress, the
  organisation which we all love. It is a defeat of the narrow minded
  leadership which had taken control of elections in Goa on behalf of
  the Congress… The Congress would have easily won the elections if it
  had remained in tune with the urges and aspirations of the people…. I
  would very humbly urge Panditji to analyse the cause of the Congress
  defeat scientifically… The success of the MGP is the success of the
  Congress ideals. It is a success of the people who had remained
  oppressed and suppressed for centuries and who are awakening
  themselves, thanks to the untiring efforts of our beloved Prime
  Minister.”<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  <p>More surprising than this was the stand Bhau took on the issue of
  immediate merger of Goa. After taking over as the chief minister, on
  the eve of Christmas, Bhau announced that he would not press for
  immediate merger of Goa into Maharashtra since he didn’t want to
  impose the merger on anybody. He also clarified that liquor
  prohibition would not be enforced in Goa and that land reforms would
  not be brought in hastily, but only after discussing the Land Reforms
  Commission’s report in the Assembly.<a href="#fn13"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13" role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a>
  The very next day, at a press conference held in Bombay, PM Nehru
  welcomed Bandodkar’s statement on the merger:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“It was true that those who were elected did not differ much
  from the Congress and he was glad that the Chief Minister Mr Bandodkar
  had decided not to raise the issue of merger for the time being, he
  said…. There was a considerable section of Roman Catholics there. They
  feared that their religion would be endangered. That fear would vanish
  in the course of time. There would be no harm if the decision about
  the future of Goa was taken after some time but it would certainly
  cause harm if it was taken immediately, he said. Mr. Nehru said he was
  glad that the elected representatives were following this
  policy.”</em><a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>After personally meeting PM Nehru in Bombay, Bandodkar told the
  media in the national capital that all the misunderstandings between
  them have been resolved. The PM was misguided by the opposition about
  voting on communal lines. He also said their topmost priority would be
  to introduce land reforms in Goa and not an immediate merger.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“We are in a position to pass a resolution right now to merge
  Goa immediately into Maharashtra. But ultimately it is the Centre that
  needs to take the necessary steps to make it happen. We would try to
  canvas our case with the legislators, members of Parliament and
  others.”</em><a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Bandodkar’s strategy of one step backward irked the two legislators
  of the PSP. They resolved to resign as the MLAs and push the Bandodkar
  government into minority. Now it was time for the top PSP leaders to
  step in. North Goa MP Peter Alvares as well as PSP supremo S M Joshi
  requested their party legislators to withdraw their decision, stating
  that the Socialist party would not take any such step that would make
  the Opposition forces stronger in the Goa Assembly. The MGP fully
  supported Bhau’s decision.<a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref16" role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> Joshi flew down to
  Goa to resolve the deadlock.<a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
  <p>The issue also erupted once again in the first Assembly session
  held for six days from 13 January. Since then the Konkani versus
  Marathi and merger versus anti-merger have become chronic issues in
  the Goa Assembly.</p>
  <h2 id="bhau-faces-mistrust-and-rebellion">Bhau Faces Mistrust And
  Rebellion</h2>
  <p>The first Assembly lasted roughly for three years, from December
  1963 to 1966. It was dissolved prematurely to hold the Opinion Poll on
  the merger issue. But it was not smooth sailing for Bhausaheb
  Bandodkar. He faced three no confidence motions, two from the
  opposition and one from his own party colleagues. The first two were
  moved by the UGP and were defeated on 24 July 1964 and 25 March 1965
  by 16 against 12. In fact Leader of Opposition Dr Jack de Sequeira
  wanted to withdraw his first motion after discussion. The ruling MGP
  pressed for it and the Speaker also rejected the opposition leader’s
  demand.<a href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a></p>
  <p>But the third motion, moved by two MGP legislators, would have
  resulted in the collapse of the Bandodkar government, if the two-month
  long internal party battle had not been resolved amicably. Even the
  Congress and PSP leaders from Maharashtra and Delhi had to intervene.
  It began on 4 September and was resolved on 10 November, one day
  before the no-trust motion came up for voting in the Assembly. The MGP
  legislators were on a warpath when India was involved in a war against
  Pakistan.</p>
  <p>In 1990, when Speaker Dr Luis Proto Barbosa led a rebellion and
  toppled Pratapsingh Rane’s Congress government, the Supreme Court
  finally ruled that the Speaker could not be a part of toppling
  activity. Dr Barbosa was accordingly disqualified as the MLA. But Dr
  Barbosa was not the first such case. The foundation was laid down by
  Goa’s first Speaker P P Shirodkar, who was earlier tipped to be the
  CM. He was actively collaborating with the rebel group against
  Bandodkar, even within the party forum. He had three MGP MLAs on his
  side: Shambhu Palienkar (Tivim), Dattaram Desai (Quepem), and Dattaram
  Chopdekar (St Estevam). In the party organisation, they were supported
  by vice president Vishwanath Lawande, Narayan Naik, M S Prabhu, Vithal
  Bablo Naik and Zotico D’Souza.</p>
  <p>Jaisinghrao V Rane and Gajanar Raikar, the PSP MLAs, had opposed
  the no-trust motion, alleging that the hidden motive behind the motion
  was that the rebels wanted to become ministers.<a href="#fn19"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19" role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a>
  Maharashtra Chief Minister Vasantrao Naik and home minister D S Desai
  of the Congress as well as PSP MP Nath Pai tried their best to bring
  peace. But both sides were adamant. Finally Bhau had to surrender to a
  compromise formula by dissolving the 25-member executive committee of
  the party and not holding both the posts − party president and chief
  minister. This was the outcome of a series of meetings in Goa and
  Bombay, proposals and counter-proposals as well as open threats and
  challenges. The internal battle turned into open mudslinging. As a
  result, the UGP decided to support the motion and the Congress also
  started reorganising itself, predicting mid-term polls.</p>
  <p>The no confidence motion moved by two MGP MLAs − Dattaram Desai and
  Shambhu Palienkar – made nine serious charges against Bhau: 1) The CM
  was behaving like an autocratic despot and had called only two
  meetings of the MGP executive committee; 2) Not having legislature
  party meetings, and reducing party legislators to rubber stamps; 3)
  Not respecting MLAs and insulting and ridiculing them in front of
  civil servants; 4) Actively supporting a magazine Janagarjana, whose
  editor N B N Gaonkar was imprisoned for breach of privilege of the
  Assembly; 5) Remaining continuously absent from the Assembly on flimsy
  and false grounds, 6) Complete lack of sympathy for freedom fighters;
  7) Making statements against the Co-operative movement and Panchayati
  Raj; 8) Interfering in the portfolios of other ministers and
  antagonising the bureaucrats; and 9) Bandodkar was a complete
  reactionary who wanted to safeguard only the vested interests of mine
  owners, capitalists, big businessmen and landlords, against the poor,
  downtrodden and exploited masses.<a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref20" role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a></p>
  <p>The UGP had also filed another motion, listing out the failures of
  the Bandodkar government in rice procurement and supply, resolving the
  grievances of government servants, sending back deputationists, and
  running an efficient administration. The opposition had also made a
  serious charge of misusing the government machinery for intimidating
  political opponents, with an open charge that dissident MLA Dattaram
  Chopdekar’s house had been searched.</p>
  <p>This reminds one of similar accusations made against the BJP chief
  minister Manohar Parrikar by the opposition, his party colleagues, and
  even RSS leaders like his political guru Subhash Velingkar. There were
  also incidents like raids being conducted on his political opponents,
  who were running hospitals and bakery shops.</p>
  <p>The two-month long mudslinging against Bhau finally stopped when he
  agreed to dissolve the party executive and hold fresh organisational
  elections within six months, set up an ad-hoc steering committee, and
  till then give powers to the Parliamentary Board to look after the
  party affairs and set up a sub-committee to draft a constitution of
  the party.<a href="#fn21" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref21"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a></p>
  <h2 id="the-one-sixth-factor">The One-Sixth Factor</h2>
  <p>‘Land to the Tiller’ was the topmost priority of the MGP
  government. But CM Bandodkar had also made it clear that no
  legislation would be enforced unless it was thoroughly debated in the
  Assembly. That too only after the Dias Commission, set up before the
  Assembly was constituted, submitted its report on land reforms.
  Accordingly, based on the report, Law Minister Tony Fernandes
  introduced the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Bill on 28 July
  1964. After heated debates in two consecutive sessions, it was finally
  passed on 10 November the same year.</p>
  <p>When it was moved formally on 4 August 1964, Bhau made it clear
  that the bill certainly aimed at eventually giving ownership of land
  to the tenant. But it had not neglected the small Bhatkar (landlords),
  who should not suffer in the bargain. This was an intermediary
  legislation where the landowners would also get a share of the produce
  until the land survey was conducted and the Land to the Tiller Act
  would be finally enforced in the future. The landowners would also be
  allowed to retain cultivable land for themselves, with a ceiling,
  provided they personally tilled the land.</p>
  <p>The bill was also moved to the Select Committee, headed by Chief
  Minister Bandodkar, on 5 August, after debating the preliminary draft
  for two days. The Committee comprised two ministers Tony Fernandes and
  V S Karmali, MGP member Vijay Kamulkar, PSP’s Jaisingrao V Rane as
  well as three UGP members: Leader of the Opposition Dr Jack Sequeira,
  Dr Alvaro Loyola Furtado and Enio Pimenta were the members.</p>
  <p>The bill was finally passed after debating the revised draft based
  on the Select Committee report, for nine long days from 26 October to
  10 November. However, the bone of contention of the debate, right from
  the first day, remained the <em>Khand</em> (share of produce), which
  was fixed at one-sixth uniformly to all kinds of lands − Ker, Khajan
  and Morod.<a href="#fn22" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref22"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>22</sup></a> It was made mandatory to the
  tenant to pay this share to the landlord. The cut-off date for being a
  tenant was 1 July 1962. Sub-letting or sub-division was prohibited.
  The bill also provided the right of resumption of land to the landlord
  for personal cultivation; two hectares for khazan land and four
  hectares for other land. The intention was that small landlords should
  not suffer due to the new legislation.</p>
  <p>Most of the UGP MLAs were bhatkars. They became the voice of
  landlords in the Assembly. Though they kept on admitting that the
  ownership of the land should finally go to the tenant, the uniform
  share of one-sixth of the produce as a token was opposed vehemently.
  Instead, they demanded half, one-third, one-fourth, and one-sixth of
  share to different kinds of land. It was also argued that Goa hardly
  had any big zamindars, that most of them were small bhatkars owning
  two to five hectares of land on an average.</p>
  <p>The Leader of the Opposition Dr Jack de Sequeira argued that only
  40 per cent of the land in Goa was effectively agricultural and 28 per
  cent was lying fallow. Around 60 per cent of land was privately owned
  but divided and fragmented within the families. The Communidades and
  the Government were the biggest landholders. In order to increase
  agricultural production, he proposed that the government should
  immediately divide the one-third uncultivated fallow land in the New
  Conquests like Canacona, Sanguem, etc. into large units, form
  governmentsubsidised cooperative societies, and that landless peasants
  and displaced tenants should be made its shareholders.</p>
  <p>He admitted that most of the shareholders of Communidades were
  neither agriculturists nor did they live in the village. They had
  sub-let it to the landless peasants. He proposed that such ‘jonoeiros’
  (shareholders) should be compensated in 20 instalments, Communidades
  should also be converted into cooperatives, and their tenants and
  sub-tenants should be made shareholders, by making the whole land as
  one cultivable unit.</p>
  <p>In the case of 60 per cent of land owned privately by bhatkars, Dr
  Sequeira proposed that they should be allowed to resume land for
  personal cultivation up to a fixed ceiling. If the owner did not
  exercise the right within two years, then only the tenant would have
  the right of ownership. He also justified the period of two years
  claiming that most of the landlords may not be conversant with the
  law.<a href="#fn23" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref23"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>23</sup></a></p>
  <p>All kinds of arguments were made by the opposition members,
  claiming that they were not speaking in favour of bhatkars but
  comprehensive land reforms. J L G Araujo, the St Cruz MLA, gave an
  example of three brothers, each one investing money in a field, a bus,
  and a shop, respectively.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“There is some kind of injustice here. Whoever is a worker
  should be regarded as a worker and should get the share in the profit.
  Why injustice to a person who invested money in the field? In saying
  this, I am not against this Bill.”</em><a href="#fn24"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref24"
  role="doc-noteref"><sup>24</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Urminda Mascarenhas Lima Leitao, the Vasco MLA, landlord and mine
  owner, asked why hay had not been included in the gross produce. Today
  hay also brings in a lot of income, she contended. She was perhaps not
  prepared to spare even hay, which was used as a natural feed for the
  cattle that the tenants keep for ploughing the fields.<a href="#fn25"
  class="footnote-ref" id="fnref25" role="doc-noteref"><sup>25</sup></a>
  And then there was a comprehensive question posed by Navelim MLA Dr
  Alvaro Loyola Furtado:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Then the next and most important question is why one-sixth? …
  Why has it not been fixed at 50 per cent of the gross produce for
  irrigated lands and 45 per cent of the produce for dry lands? Why not
  one-fourth of the gross produce for irrigated lands and one-fifth in
  other cases or three to five times the land revenue according to the
  class of soil, which is less as in Telangana? Why not one-fifth of the
  produce or its value if the share-cropper supplies plough, cattle etc
  and one-fourth of its value if the landowner provides plough, cattle,
  etc. as in Assam? Why not one-fourth of the gross produce as in Bihar?
  Why not one-fourth of the produce for wetland and one-third for dry
  lands and in the case of small owners half of the produce as in Jammu
  and Kashmir? Then why not 35 per cent where irrigation is supplemented
  by lift irrigation and 33 and one third per cent in other cases as in
  Madras? Why not one-fourth of the gross produce for lands irrigated
  from tanks or river channels and one-fifth in other cases or value
  thereof as in Mysore?”</em><a href="#fn26" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref26" role="doc-noteref"><sup>26</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>In reply, Law Minister Tony Fernandes said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“But the fact that this territory of ours is not &gt;in
  Kashmir, neither it is in Mysore, nor in Madras, has been
  &gt;forgotten. It is here on the Konkan coast bordering Maharashtra
  where it has &gt;been already fixed that the rent should not be more
  than one-sixth. &gt;I say not more than one-sixth because it is
  misunderstood by the &gt;Opposition that it is just a fraction –
  one-sixth. But it is not so. In &gt;the subsequent section it has been
  further clarified that the &gt;ratio of rent will be fixed after the
  survey and settlement.”</em><a href="#fn27" class="footnote-ref"
  id="fnref27" role="doc-noteref"><sup>27</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Well-studied lengthy and argumentative speeches in favour of the
  bill were also made by almost all the MGP and PSP members, from the
  day the bill was introduced till it was passed. Mandrem MLA Vijay
  Kamulkar, a teacher who had defeated two mighty landlords Raoraje
  Deshprabhu of the Congress and Sadhashiv Desai of the UGP, said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“The farmers had faced all kinds of harassment from the
  landlords with the blessings of the Portuguese rulers. The Portuguese
  would have not been a mighty empire if these landlords had not helped
  them. In return, the Portuguese protected the interests of the
  landlords and gave them extensive powers to extort the produce the
  farmers were growing in their fields. I am grateful to all the
  Shetkari Sanghatana as well as Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who
  made us aware about our rights, after Goa was made independent.
  However, I wish this act would not antagonise but establish a cordial
  relation between the landlords and the tenants. The landlords should
  also be not deprived of some land for cultivation, but with a ceiling.
  I also urge the government to set up a council to monitor the
  implementation of the act. Otherwise the landlords would keep on
  approaching civil courts to stall its implementation.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The bill was finally passed with UGP staging walkouts on two
  consecutive days. On 9 November, Calangute MLA J M D’Souza did not
  join the protest: “<em>I do not wish to walk out because I wish to
  place my faith in the Government that it will see its way doing
  something, to give some kind of satisfaction to the Opposition.</em>”
  The next day, however, he joined them. Dr Jack de Sequeira, before the
  walkout, termed the bill as absolutely obnoxious and vexatious,
  ill-advised, ill-timed and ill-conceived; full of ‘ills’.</p>
  <p>Even before Bhau could complete one year, he had succeeded in
  winning the hearts and souls of the whole farming community of Goa,
  irrespective of caste, creed, or religion. A real masterstroke of his
  Bahujan Formula!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
  role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Interview with Ramdas
  Prabhugaonkar, Ex-Secretary, Goa Hindu Association, Mumbai<a
  href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>Press Trust of India, Bombay, 13
  December 1963 269<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 14 December
  1963<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; महाराष्ट्रवादी गोमंतक
  पक्ष, स्थापना आणि वाटचाल, पान 27<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Next Steps, Editorial, The
  Navhind Times, 13 December 1963<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 18 December
  1963<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन: मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान
  75<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 12 December
  1963<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 18 December
  1963<a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Press Trust of India in Mumbai, 24
  December 1963<a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 14 December
  1963<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 17 December
  1963<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 25 December
  1963<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>Press Trust of India, Bombay, 26
  December 1963<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>Press Trust of India, New Delhi,
  28 December 1963<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक, 7 जानेवारी 1964<a
  href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक, 11 जानेवारी 1964<a
  href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 24 July 1964<a
  href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 20 October
  1964<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn20" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 9 November
  1964<a href="#fnref20" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn21" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times, 11 November
  1964<a href="#fnref21" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn22" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goa Agricultural Tenancy Act: “Ker
  land” means land having<a href="#fnref22" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn23" role="doc-endnote"><p>Legislative Assembly of Goa 1964:
  4 August 1964, P 1202-1205<a href="#fnref23" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn24" role="doc-endnote"><p>Legislative Assembly of Goa 1964:
  4 August 1964, P 1214<a href="#fnref24" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn25" role="doc-endnote"><p>Legislative Assembly of Goa 1964:
  9 November 1964, P 1825<a href="#fnref25" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn26" role="doc-endnote"><p>Legislative Assembly of Goa 1964:
  9 November 1964, P 1827<a href="#fnref26" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn27" role="doc-endnote"><p>Legislative Assembly of Goa 1964:
  9 November 1964, P 1829<a href="#fnref27" class="footnote-back"
  role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
