<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: Opinion Poll Matters, Not The ...</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-12">Chapter 12</h3>
  <h1 id="opinion-poll-matters-not-the-">Opinion (Poll) Matters, Not The ...</h1>
  <p>The initial plan of the MGP and PSP was to embarrass the Centre. The MGP would win the first election, then resign en masse within six months, face a new election, and once again resign en masse. This was meant to use the Assembly election as a pressure tactic to merge Goa into Maharashtra.[^1] But things changed dramatically once the MGP came to power. Bhausaheb Bandodkar himself, along with the MGP and the PSP leaders, postponed the agenda of the merger. Instead he concentrated on their core agenda of Land to the Tiller and overall development of Goa in the fields of education, health, agriculture, fishing, industry, cooperation, and even the development of the Mormugao port.</p>
  <p>With the elected government coming to power, the Planning Commission of India increased the plan outlay for Goa from Rs 95 lakh to Rs 250 lakh. It also sanctioned grants of Rs seven crore for core areas like agriculture, industry, electricity, education, and health. The number of primary schools shot up from 292 in 1961 to 840 in 1964 with new school buildings coming up in the rural areas. Private primary and secondary schools as well as colleges in the cities were encouraged. Goa’s health infrastructure at the rural level was strengthened with six cottage hospitals equipped with 330 beds, 12 rural health centres, and three mobile health vehicles. Potable water was provided to the interior areas of the New Conquests like Ponda, Sanguem, Quepem etc., besides the cities. Panchayats brought 1400 acres of fallow land under cultivation, roads were built, bandhs and buildings were repaired, new wells were dug, irrigation facilities were provided, three industrial estates were set up, welfare centres were started for pregnant women, and 58 fair price shops were opened for ration. Bandodkar also requested the Centre to enhance the plan to build infrastructure like roads and bridges.[^2]</p>
  <p>This did not mean that the crucial issue of the merger was forgotten. But Bhau was apparently convinced that it was not possible without the Centre’s blessings. Thus the issue remained in limbo for as long as Nehru was alive. Panditji left the world on 27 May 1964 and the ball of the merger began to roll once again.</p>
  <h2 id="mid-term-to-plebiscite">Mid-Term To Plebiscite</h2>
  <p>On 9 June 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri took over as the Prime Minister of India. With pressure from Maharashtra-based central leaders like Y B Chavan etc., the Centre began to toy with the idea of dissolving the Goa Assembly and holding fresh mid-term polls on the issue of the merger. The proposal started to gain ground with CM Bandodkar facing a rebellion within his own party to the extent of his own party men filing a no confidence motion against him with the help of the opposition UGP. However, in view of the India-Pakistan conflict that came centre stage, PM Shastri deferred the decision of mid-term polls. During his Bombay visit on 20 October, he reviewed the Goa situation, where he was also told that the rebellion was more ‘personal’ than issue-based.[^3] Shastri officially confirmed the decision to defer the Goa mid-term polls in the Lok Sabha when PSP MP Hari Vishnu Kamat raised the issue on 24 November 1964.[^4]</p>
  <p>Meanwhile, the issue got a sudden twist with the visit of Railway Minister S K Patil to Goa in the last week of October 1964. He had come down to review the party organisation in the wake of the election debacle in the previous year. Replying to a media question on the merger during a press conference on 31 October, Patil said that the Central Parliamentary Board, at its meeting on 7 April, had decided that Goa would continue as a union territory for 10 years, after which Goans could decide their status through a ‘referendum’.[^5]</p>
  <p>The very next day, on 1 November, Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri was quizzed by the media in Bombay. He avoided a straightforward reply, claiming that he could not recollect what the Board had decided. He recalled a decision taken by the Parliamentary Board before the Goa election, when Nehru was alive. But with the Goa election result, he felt that the decision needed to be relooked into. He also admitted that there were serious differences within the Congress on this issue, making special mention of S K Patil.</p>
  <p>The MGP instantly opposed Patil’s proposal of a plebiscite while CM Bandodkar rushed to Bombay to meet PM Shastri, pressing for an immediate merger. The Prime Minister invited him to Delhi to discuss the matter threadbare while requesting him to defer the MGP decision to move a resolution on the merger in the Goa Assembly. On 3 November, in Bombay, Patil contradicted the PM, stating that he had made the statement in Goa based on a decision at a joint meeting he had with the PM and Congress President Kamraj before leaving for Goa. “But the referendum is my personal opinion,” he clarified.[^6]</p>
  <p>Surprisingly, the UGP took five days to react to Patil’s proposal of a plebiscite. Rather than having a press conference on the issue, Dr Jack de Sequeira preferred to issue a short press note, terming the decision of a referendum practical and sensible. This decision will put an end to the number of interpretations that were attempted, he stated.[^7] Gomantak, in its editorial, called it UGP’s volte face from its original demand of Statehood for Goa.[^8] PSP leader, S M Joshi termed Patil’s announcement as a ‘bomb explosion’ on the eve of Diwali, which would have serious repercussions. The Kannadigas in Karnataka, on the other hand, welcomed Patil’s announcement.[^9]</p>
  <p>Actually, Patil had echoed the opinion PM Nehru had expressed earlier at an AICC session held in Jaipur on 7 June 1963. When a group of Maharashtra politicians asked him how the wishes of the people of Goa would be determined, Nehru had told them: “It will be done through a referendum.”[^10]</p>
  <p>Patil’s game, however, drew flak from his own party colleagues. The front pages of the newspapers of 4 November were seen with contradictory statements of Maharashtra’s Congress leaders on the issue of Goa. The day Patil spoke to the media, his colleagues Defence Minister Y B Chavan and Maharashtra CM Vasantrao Naik publicly appealed to the Congress leadership to rethink the Board decision and immediately merge Goa into Maharashtra. The Goa cabinet met in Goa on 6 November and sent a memorandum to the PM urging the merger, and also planning a series of mass protests.</p>
  <p>The weeklong controversy was put to rest temporarily when the Congress President Kamraj assured a delegation of Maharashtra Congressmen that the Parliamentary Board would reconsider its decision.[^11]</p>
  <p>CM Bandodkar then organised a massive pro-merger rally in the state capital of Panaji, following which the state government passed a private member’s resolution in Goa Assembly on 22 January 1965 demanding Goa’s merger into Maharashtra. The minority UGP walked out in protest. Following this, the Maharashtra Legislature passed an official resolution on 10 March 1965. Maharashtra CM Vasantrao Naik himself moved the resolution, and assured to grant special status to Goa and protect its identity, religion, culture, language, education, and social fabric. Not to be outdone, the Mysore Assembly passed a resolution on 12 March, condemning the Maharashtra Assembly resolution. It cited the pre-Portuguese rule of South Indian dynasties over Goa as well as Konkani-speaking settlers in Mysore, besides geographical, cultural, and linguistic aspects.[^12]</p>
  <p>Under immense pressure, the Shastri cabinet decided to hold a mid-term assembly poll in Goa on the issue of merger. The Goa Congress strongly opposed this decision. Goa Congress President Purushottam Kakodkar, a leading freedom fighter, tried to convince the party leadership to reconsider the cabinet decision. He didn’t succeed. Then Kakodkar suddenly disappeared. It made national news. Suspicion was rife that he may have been eliminated by the pro-merger camp. Three months later, however, he reappeared, claiming that he had been meditating at the Sivananda Ashram in Rishikesh. Meanwhile, PM Shastri suddenly died in Tashkent, Uzbekistan (in the then Soviet Union) on 11 January 1966, a day after signing a peace treaty to end the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War.</p>
  <p>The powerful ‘syndicate’ of K Kamaraj of Madras, Atulya Ghosh of West Bengal, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy of Andhra Pradesh, S Nijalingappa of Mysore and S K Patil of Maharashtra, which had elevated Shastri to the PM’s post after Nehru’s death, backed Indira Gandhi for prime ministership over Morarji Desai. Indira Gandhi took over as the Prime Minister in late January. A UGP delegation led by Dr Jack de Sequeira met Mrs Gandhi on 6 May 1966. Goa Congress chief Kakodkar met her, as well as Congress President K Kamaraj, on 21 June. Both pitched Nehru and Patil’s proposal for a referendum instead of a mid-term poll, but Mrs Gandhi declined to reverse the decision of the Shastri cabinet.</p>
  <p>Kakodkar then played some astute politics. Though Deputy Prime Minister Morarji Desai also declined his request, he managed to get an assurance from Desai that he would not oppose an alternative, if it was proposed in the Parliamentary Board. S K Patil, now a powerful member of the ‘syndicate’, moved the vital resolution at the Congress Parliamentary Board meeting on 3 September 1966. Patil proposed that instead of a mid-term poll, a ‘different kind of mechanism’ be evolved to resolve Goa’s merger issue. Neither Morarji Desai, Indira Gandhi, nor Kamraj opposed it. The Congress didn’t want to call it a ‘referendum’ or a ‘plebiscite’ because of the Kashmir issue. Consequently, Union Home Secretary L K Singh proposed that it be called an ‘Opinion Poll’.</p>
  <p>The UGP demanded that the MGP government resign so that the referendum could be conducted in a free-andfair atmosphere. Goa Chief Minister Bhausaheb Bandodkar gracefully resigned on 28 November 1966, paving the way for a level-playing field. President’s Rule was imposed on 3 December.</p>
  <h2 id="who-is-a-goan">Who Is A Goan?</h2>
  <p>Holding a referendum was not an easy exercise for the Centre. The Constitution of India had no provision to hold a referendum or a plebiscite. It was happening for the first time in the Indian Republic. There were referendums held earlier, while Free India was getting created. But they were held to decide whether people wanted to join Free India, may it be in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP, in Pakistan) held on 6 July 1947, in Sylhet (then in Assam and now in Bangladesh) held on 7 July 1947 or in Junagadh (in Saurashtra, Gujarat) held on 20 February 1948. Nehru had even proposed a similar referendum for Goa, Daman and Diu, on 4 February 1949, in the United Nations Organisation (UNO). But Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio de Oliveira Salazar rejected it. Much later in 1975, a plebiscite was held for Sikkim, on 14 April 1975 after Indian troops occupied the North Eastern state in April 1975.</p>
  <p>In tune with the same spirit, the Goa, Daman &amp; Diu Opinion Poll Bill, 1966 was introduced on 21 November and then was moved on 30 November 1966 in the Parliament. Interestingly, it was moved by Deputy Minister for Home Affairs Vidya Charan Shukla. Union Home Minister Yashwantrao Chavan, the strongest proponent for Goa’s merger, avoided tabling the Bill signed in his name. After lengthy debates in both the Houses − the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha − the bill was passed on 1 December 1966.</p>
  <p>The most interesting part of the debate was ‘Who is a Goan?’ The Maharashtrians, Kannadigas and other migrant Indians living in Goa as well? Or those lakhs of Goans who had to migrate to Bombay and other states during the Portuguese regime but had their homes in Goa? Acharya Kripalani hit out directly at North Goa MP Peter Alvares, asking if he was a Goan when he had always lived in Bombay. “<em>Living in Bombay, if Peter Alvares can contest from Goa, why can’t a Goan living in Bombay vote in the Opinion Poll?</em>” he asked. Alvares admitted that the definition of a Goan was difficult, but also asserted that Goans living outside Goa and settled in other parts of India should not be considered as voters.</p>
  <p>Deputy Home Minister Shukla finally clarified that Goans living outside Goa, who could prove they were ordinarily residents of Goa, could enrol themselves as voters. No minimum residential period was required to prove that a person was an ordinary resident of Goa. The House however rejected a series of other amendments including giving the right to participate in the Poll to all those who had declared themselves as Goans under the Goa, Daman and Diu Citizenship Order 1962. This option was given to Goans when the Portuguese era came to an end.[13]</p>
  <p>On the forefront to get outside Goans enrolled as voters was the UGP. Dr Jack de Sequeira left no stone unturned to achieve this demand, as most of the Goans working or settled outside were Christians, who were dead against merging Goa’s identity. The UGP led delegations to Delhi to meet the MPs of different parties while Goans opposing the merger formed organisations in Bombay to convince the ‘Bombay voters of Goa’. The party wanted not only Goans settled in different parts of India but also those settled abroad to be given voting rights. The UGP also wanted the facility of postal ballots for Goans working overseas, including the seamen.</p>
  <p>However, during his three-day visit to Goa, Chief Election Commissioner K V K Sundaram ruled out voting rights for ‘original’ Goans who were permanently settled outside Goa. Since this statement created further confusion, next day in Bombay he clarified that such Goans would be allowed to vote if they convinced the registrar that they were temporarily staying outside but were ordinarily permanent residents of Goa. He rapped these Goans asking why they had not enrolled themselves in the 1963 election. He also rejected the demand for a postal ballot for the Goan seamen.[^14]</p>
  <p>Finally, Goa had 60,321 new voters; some from outside, especially those working in Bombay. From 3,28,071 in the 1963 election, the electorate had swollen to 3,88,392, a rise of 16 per cent.</p>
  <h2 id="mobilising-the-opinion">Mobilising The “Opinion”</h2>
  <p>The President gave his assent to the Goa, Daman and Diu (Opinion Poll) Act on 11 December 1966, and the Election Commission of India (EC) was authorised to hold the Opinion Poll based on the electoral roll prepared for the Lok Sabha elections scheduled in 1967. The EC allotted two symbols: a Flower to opt for merger with Maharashtra, and Two Leaves to retain Goa as a Union Territory. The Opinion Poll, free India’s first referendum, was scheduled on 16 January 1967.</p>
  <p>But the wheels of the Opinion Poll had started moving in Goa much earlier; soon after the Congress Parliamentary Board had decided to recommend a ‘different kind of mechanism’ to solve the merger issue. For the 38 per cent Christian population of Goa, it was a matter of sheer survival. The Christians stood to lose their demographic status of a ‘major minority’ forever; they would be marginalised to a mere 2 per cent minority in a 4-crore strong Maharashtra, which had just six lakh Christians. Goa would be Maharashtra’s 28th district and, with its sevenlakh population, one of the smallest. Each of the 270 Assembly constituencies in Maharashtra comprised 60,000 to 1 lakh voters. Each Goa assembly constituency had just 10,000 to 15,000 voters. Goa would have got a maximum of four to five assembly constituencies in Maharashtra. For Christians, having even one constituency of their own would be a far-fetched dream. For Goan Christians, the Opinion Poll was a do-or-die fight to the finish.</p>
  <p>But politics in Goa was not a straightforward Hindu-vs- Christian equation. Rather, it was the Hindu non-Brahmin Bahujan Samaj versus the rest; the Hindu peasantry versus the Hindu landlords, and the latter aligning with the minority Christians. Neither was it a linguistic battle as is being projected, that is, Konkani versus Marathi.</p>
  <p>I had the opportunity to interview Uday Bhembre, one of the stalwarts of the Opinion Poll, for three-and-a-half hours on behalf of the Konkani Bhasha Mandal. He categorically stated: “<em>The Opinion Poll was not fought on linguistic grounds. Konkani-Marathi was just one of the arguments. It was purely a political battle for Goa’s socio-political identity.</em>” He also said that Rashtramat, the Marathi daily the anti-mergerists had launched to reach out to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, had the Konkaniwadis as well as Marathiwadis, who were opposed to the merger.</p>
  <p>As the voice of the free media was suppressed during the Portuguese regime, post-liberation Goa witnessed varied kinds of media organisations: newspapers, weeklies, and even fortnightlies in Romi and Devanagari Konkani, Marathi and English besides pre-liberation Portuguese newspapers. Within three years of Independence, Goa was publishing 26 newsrelated periodicals.[^15] That number had increased further when the Opinion Poll was held.</p>
  <p>The mainstream news media consisted of mine owner Vishwasrao Chowgule’s Gomantak, founded on 24 March 1962; followed by Dempo’s The Navhind Times on 18 February 1963; and Novem Goem (1962), a fortnightly in Konkani written in the Devanagari script. Sot (1962) and Uzvadd (1963) were weeklies in Romi Konkani. Pradip and Gomant Vani were dailies in Marathi. The two Marathi newspapers campaigned for merger. The other publications opposed merger tooth-and-nail. But their circulation was very limited, except for Gomantak and The Navhind Times.</p>
  <p>To reach out to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, a group of young Konkani writers came together to start Rashtramat, a Marathi daily, in 1964. Their initial effort of ‘crowdfunding’ did not work and they approached the mine owners. Seven mine owners from the three families of Salgaocar, Timblo and Gosalia together funded the venture. Rashtramat’s mission was to counter the pro-merger propaganda of Goa’s then sole Marathi daily Gomantak, which was run by the Chowgules. Their target readership was the Hindu Bahujan Samaj. Winning the Opinion Poll with 38 per cent Christians and two per cent Hindu Brahmins was next to impossible when all the Christians, due to heavy migration, were not available for voting.</p>
  <p>The experiment of Rashtramat not only worked but played wonders. It succeeded in countering the pro-merger propaganda of not only Goa’s Marathi newspapers but also the newspapers from Maharashtra like Pudhari (Kolhapur), Sakal (Pune), Maharashtra Times (Bombay) and Maratha, a daily edited by Prahlad Keshav aka ‘Acharya’ Atre, a firebrand orator and writer. Udaybab’s daily column Brahmastra in Rashtramat became a matter of discussion in most of the households, especially in the New Conquests and among the Hindu Bahujan Samaj. Udaybab recalls that Rashtramat changed its strategy when it realised that people were in a mood to weigh the issue ahead of the poll. Rather than outright attacks on the mergerist viewpoint, the newspaper began logically explaining the issue, putting forth arguments designed to convince sceptics. The main thrust of the public awareness campaigns was around small group meetings, public meetings, distributing printed material like handbills and displaying banners as well as holding cultural programmes. The fever of the Opinion Poll had gripped Goa’s villages and the towns soon after the official announcement.</p>
  <p>Tense moments were witnessed practically every day, with groups on both sides disrupting meetings, blocking roads and sometimes even throwing eggs and stones at speakers. Police stations were flooded with complaints and counter-complaints. Women complained about sexually coloured remarks. How much was true and how much was just an attempt to defame the other side is hard to tell. People from both sides were arrested. There were also occasional serious incidents like beatings and stabbings.</p>
  <p>The really interesting battle was on the cultural front. Maharashtra’s popular Lal Bavtta Kala Pathak led by Shahir Amar Shaikh, as well as Shahir Sable, enthralled crowds with inspiring patriotic Marathi songs like Jai Jai Maharashtra Mazha (Victory to my Maharashtra), to generate support for merger.</p>
  <p>To counter them, a young brigade of singers, musicians and lyricists led by Ulhas Buyao entered the arena, styling themselves as the Jai Gomantak Kala Pathak. Their Konkani campaign songs like Goenchea Mhojea Goenkarano, Jayat Jage and Channeache Rati long outlived the movement to become popular folk songs that even today’s younger generation continues to enjoy. Interestingly, while the banners displayed at public meetings by both sides were always in Marathi in the New Conquests, all the speeches made by even the pro-merger Goan leaders, were almost always in Konkani.</p>
  <p>Another unique campaign came up when the pro-merger camp brought the ‘padukas’ (sacred footwear) of the goddess Bhavani, a beloved Maratha icon, to Goa, in an attempt to polarise voters on religious lines. Shabu Desai, himself a proud Maratha and staunch MGP supporter from Cuncolim, rose up in rebellion against his own party. He marched across the length and breadth of Goa with a Sangh Pradesh Jyot (Union Territory Torch), along with an image of Goa’s own beloved deity, Shantadurga Kunkolikarin of Fatorpa. Hundreds of youth joined his march, and devout Goans welcomed the deity, especially in the Hindu-dominated New Conquests.</p>
  <h2 id="the-lobbies--the-groups">The Lobbies &amp; The Groups</h2>
  <p>It was an established fact that the small and big landlord class was strongly against the merger because Maharashtra, among all the states, had the most revolutionary land reforms in the country. It had begun producing results with a co-operative movement, which unfortunately later became the powerful political and financial lobby of Sahakar Samrats. But there was another influential lobby that wholeheartedly supported the antimerger movement financially, that of the mine owners in Goa. The Portuguese regime had granted 893 mining concessions, and made them deemed owners of the iron ore mines.</p>
  <p>Post-World War II, in its reconstruction phase, Japan began importing low-grade iron ore from Portuguese Goa. Goa’s first mining concession was granted in 1906, but the mining business actually started booming only in the last decade of Portuguese rule in Goa.</p>
  <p>Soon after liberation, Goa’s iron ore mines were brought under the ambit of The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957, governed by the Government of India, to convert these concessions into leases. Since then, Goa’s mine ‘owners’ have been moving from the Bombay High Court to the Supreme Court to retain their ‘rights’. The court case is still pending before the Supreme Court.</p>
  <p>When the Opinion Poll was announced, the obvious fear was that if Goa was merged into Maharashtra, the mines would be governed by the laws in Maharashtra and India, on par with mines of bigger states. Consequently, Goa’s mining lobby stood firmly behind the anti-merger movement, giving it full financial support. Rashtramat was one such venture of seven mine owners. However, there were also some passionate mine owners like V M Salgaocar, who was playing a pro-active role to retain Goa’s identity by taking Bhau head-on. My maternal uncle Ulhas Buyao told me that VM used to personally attend his musical shows held on open grounds and honour him with garlands of currency notes if he liked any particular song. On the other hand, Chowgule’s Gomantak was tilting more towards the merger.</p>
  <p>In the campaign that Bandodkar led for the Flower, much of the publicity material as well as the speakers were ‘imported’ from Maharashtra. The Maharashtra Vilinikaran Samiti took the initiative to constitute an All-Party Goa Merger Committee consisting of the Congress, the Praja Samajwadi Party (PSP), the communist parties CPI and CPI(M), the Jan Sangh, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and even trade unions like the Congress-run INTUC and the Workers’ Union of India.</p>
  <p>At Bandodkar’s request, 100 volunteers were sent from Maharashtra to campaign. But the most powerful orators like Acharya Atre, Jayantrao Tilak, Shirubhau Limaye, S M Joshi, etc., stayed away. Congress leader and Rajya Sabha MP Mohan Dharia coordinated the campaign from behind the scenes, while Socialist leaders like Barrister Nath Pai, the MP from Goa’s neighbouring Rajapur constituency, addressed public meetings.</p>
  <p>The anti-merger camp worked on five different platforms, with hardly any coordination. The different groups seldom shared a platform, even though they had no significant political differences; if they came together at all, it was at the initiative of locals. All the groups came together in only one large antimerger rally that was held in Margao.</p>
  <p>The Congress camp was not seen in public. Since the party was vertically divided over the issue in Maharashtra and Goa as well as at the Centre, party President K Kamaraj imposed a ban on public participation in the Opinion Poll campaign and told party members to ‘play neutral’. Congressmen in Goa worked only at the cadre level and campaigned secretively. No major Congress leader from Maharashtra came to Goa to campaign.</p>
  <p>The United Goans Party held public meetings, but predominantly in the Christian belt. Its leader Dr Jack de Sequeira, however, moved all over Goa fearlessly and tirelessly, in spite of threats to his life from opponents. He is believed to have addressed 120 public meetings in 30 days. Not to be outdone, Dayanand Bandodkar addressed 133 meetings during the campaign.</p>
  <p>UGP’s propaganda was centred around Goans losing their identity, language, and culture. The party’s modus operandi was to get each and every voter to the polling booth. The UGP did not spare any efforts to get the maximum number of people, especially Christians, onto the electoral roll.</p>
  <p>The young Rashtramat brigade comprised young writers and thinkers in their 20s and 30s, not politicians. They concentrated their efforts in the Hindu-dominated New Conquest areas, facing all kinds of risks. Getting booed, stoned, and even beaten up was all in a day’s work. But the oratory and logical arguments of these Young Turks made people introspect and rethink their emotional attachment to becoming a part of Maharashtra.</p>
  <h2 id="the-teasers--the-arguments">The Teasers &amp; The Arguments</h2>
  <p>There were quite a few interesting sidelights in the campaign. To run the private Marathi schools that came up during Portuguese rule, hundreds of teachers had been encouraged to come to Goa from Maharashtra, especially in the New Conquest areas. These gurujis were among the most respected people in their villages.</p>
  <p>After liberation, they were all absorbed into government service under the central government pay scale. It provided them job security as well as a huge increase in their income. During the Portuguese era, they were paid by the villagers themselves; sometimes just a handful of rice from each peasant household, a traditional form of crowdfunding called mushtifund.</p>
  <p>Salaries for teachers in Maharashtra were much lower than the central government scale. The teachers also wanted to protect themselves from possible transfers in a huge state like Maharashtra with an area of 3 lakh square kilometres; in comparison, Goa’s 3700 sq.km area seemed like a comfort zone. Consequently, teachers secretly campaigned house-tohouse in their localities, endorsing the anti-merger arguments raised by the Rashtramat group.</p>
  <p>The major employer of educated youth from the villages, after liberation, was the Government of Goa, which paid the central government scale. The Maharashtra government’s pay scale was lower in comparison. This created a scare among the young educated white-collar neo-middle class from the Bahujan Samaj, who were often the most influential people in their localities.</p>
  <p>Goans were also concerned about price rise. They were already somewhat upset over the taxation policy of the Centre in the liberated union territory. Under Portuguese rule, Goa had been a duty-free port. Taxes in Maharashtra were much higher than in the union territory.</p>
  <p>Liquor was banned in Maharashtra which, unlike Goa, had Prohibition. This became a bone of contention. To counter the ‘scare’, Maharashtra chief minister Vasantrao Naik announced in the legislative Assembly that his government would not extend Prohibition to Goa.</p>
  <p>To clear the confusion, the Bombay-based All-Party Goa Merger Committee and Goa’s pro-merger leaders formally met the Maharashtra Chief Minister, and requested him to make his government’s policy clear on the pay scales of government employees, on price rise as well as Prohibition. They also demanded a special position for Goa in its five-year development plan, and for representation in the state cabinet. However, no firm assurance, except on Prohibition, came from the Maharashtra CM.</p>
  <p>The arguments were many. Besides the historical background of Maharashtra kings ruling Goa, it was argued that Marathi had deep roots in Goan society, from education and culture to literature and even religious rituals. The anti-merger stance was labelled a ‘Portuguese mentality’.</p>
  <p>The anti-merger camp, especially Rashtramat, said the merger was an expansionist action by Maharashtra. They insisted that Goa had a distinct culture, unique from Maharashtra, and that Konkani was an independent language. Goans adopted Marathi for education only because Konkani was suppressed in Goa during Portuguese rule, while Marathi was able to flourish in neighbouring Maharashtra. To counter the ‘Portuguese mentality’ charge, they overtly exhibited an anti-Portuguese nationalist spirit with the help of freedom fighters who opposed the merger.</p>
  <p>To cite a few creative arguments, people were asked:</p>
  <p>“Do you want to get marginalised from 28 constituencies to a mere four?”</p>
  <p>“Is it possible for your MLAs to become ministers in Maharashtra and take quick decisions for your welfare?”</p>
  <p>“What do you prefer? Going all the way to Bombay to get your work done at the state headquarters or going to Panaji?”</p>
  <p>“In Goa, the MGP has already implemented a ‘Land to the Tiller’ Act. Why do we need to be in Maharashtra to get our land rights?”</p>
  <p>And the final masterstroke, which worked wonders: “Don’t you want ‘our’ Bhau (Bandodkar) to continue as chief minister? In Maharashtra, at the most, he would become a token ‘minority minister’.”</p>
  <h2 id="three-day-long-football-match">Three-Day-Long Football Match</h2>
  <p>Sunday 15 January 1967 witnessed the silence before the storm. Only the roar of the sea could be heard; no one knew which way the wind was blowing. The campaign had stopped at 5 pm on the previous day. It was the eve of a perfect storm. The ‘outside’ Goans landed in Goa, many of them on 16 January itself, by air, rail and the most popular and cheapest means of travel to Goa then, by ship. In fact, two ships arrived from Bombay, the Champavati and Konkan Sevak. Some Goans flew in from as far away as Delhi. A few even travelled from African countries like Kenya and Mozambique.</p>
  <p>People lined up at all the 442 election booths much before polling started at 8 am. Many polling officers had to extend the deadline of 5 pm by two and even three hours. In villages without electricity, Petromax lanterns had to be brought in for the polling process to be completed. Not just old people, but even patients and those bedridden were carried to the booth to cast their votes.</p>
  <p>There was an allegation that a large group of underage seminarians from the Rachol Seminary had voted. In fact, the 1951-born former Chief Minister of Goa Luizinho Faleiro once admitted publicly that he had cast a bogus vote – twice – in the Opinion Poll when he was just 15 years old.</p>
  <p>The total turnout was 82 per cent. Altogether 3,17,633 people voted. Just two per cent of the votes were declared invalid. The enthusiasm of the voters was unprecedented. The subsequent Assembly election held just after a month, on 21 February 1967, recorded only a 68 per cent turnout, the thirdlowest in 13 Assembly elections till 2017.</p>
  <p>VOTER TURNOUT (%): 1963 &amp; OPINION POLL</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>Constituency</th>
  <th>1963</th>
  <th>OP</th>
  <th>Difference</th>
  <th>Constituency</th>
  <th>1963</th>
  <th>OP</th>
  <th>Difference</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Aldona</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>97</td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>Cortalim</td>
  <td>73</td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td>73</td>
  <td>96</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>Shiroda</td>
  <td>62</td>
  <td>85</td>
  <td>23</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Madkai</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>95</td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>Tivim</td>
  <td>71</td>
  <td>85</td>
  <td>14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Panaji</td>
  <td>77</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>Benaulim</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>17</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>St. Cruz</td>
  <td>82</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Margao</td>
  <td>74</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Mapusa</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>93</td>
  <td>17</td>
  <td>Pale</td>
  <td>74</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>St. Andre</td>
  <td>79</td>
  <td>93</td>
  <td>14</td>
  <td>Curchorem</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>82</td>
  <td>11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Calangute</td>
  <td>73</td>
  <td>93</td>
  <td>20</td>
  <td>Mandrem</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>82</td>
  <td>12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Siolim</td>
  <td>74</td>
  <td>90</td>
  <td>17</td>
  <td>Curtorim</td>
  <td>65</td>
  <td>80</td>
  <td>15</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td>78</td>
  <td>89</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Sattari</td>
  <td>65</td>
  <td>80</td>
  <td>15</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>St. Estevam</td>
  <td>77</td>
  <td>89</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>79</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>73</td>
  <td>88</td>
  <td>15</td>
  <td>Pedne</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>16</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Cuncolim</td>
  <td>63</td>
  <td>88</td>
  <td>25</td>
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>75</td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Navelim</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>87</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>76</td>
  <td>74</td>
  <td>-3</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>All across Goa people showed enthusiasm. Eleven constituencies recorded polling percentages of nearly 90 per cent or above. Aldona recorded the highest: 97 per cent. Not a single constituency recorded below 74 per cent. This was unprecedented compared to the previous Assembly election held three years ago or any other election held in Goa till date. In Mormugao, three per cent less voting than 1963 was recorded. But in terms of numbers, it was nearly double that of the previous election, because the number of voters had shot up in this port town from 11,000 to 21,000. Compared to 8624 polled in 1963, people who came out for Opinion Poll were 16,000. Obviously, the large turnout had increased the hopes of both the sides − merger and anti-merger.</p>
  <p>The Goa government had declared a holiday for counting, which began on 17 January. But it continued till the morning of 19 January, much beyond the scheduled deadline; the afternoon of the 18th. The counting centre at the Institute Menezes Braganza in the heart of the state capital, Panaji, was surrounded by armed policemen, including central paramilitary forces.</p>
  <p>At sharp 9 am started Goa’s most exciting ‘football match’. The local station of All India Radio (AIR) was continuously broadcasting a live commentary on the counting. Even then, hundreds of people gathered round this historic building to listen to the announcements of booth-wise results over the loudspeaker.</p>
  <p>A graph displayed on a huge billboard showed the cumulative percentage of votes for the Flower and Two Leaves. It boosted and depressed the blood pressure of the public for three long days. It was like watching a gripping football match; a game which Goans dearly love.</p>
  <p>The first day’s counting saw jubilation in the mergerist camp, as 11 constituencies from North Goa with 1,21,374 votes (31 per cent) were taken up for counting. It included five segments from the New Conquests and six from the Old Conquests, eight of which were MGP strongholds. These were Pernem, Mandrem, Siolim, Mapusa, Tivim, Bicholim, Pale, and Sattari. The UGP strongholds were Calangute, Aldona, and Panaji. At the end of the day, the Flower led by 10,579 votes. Though the pro-merger public was ecstatic, pro-merger politicians were disappointed. Two Leaves had got nearly 26 per cent of the votes in the MGP strongholds, which was not at all expected.</p>
  <p>The election authorities could not complete counting the votes on the second day. Ballots in 13 more Assembly segments were counted. One again, eight among them were MGP strongholds: St Estevam, Madkai, Ponda, Shiroda, Sanguem,Canacona, Quepem, and Curchorem. The UGP The graph shows percentage of votes polled in the constituencies of MGP &amp; UGP strongholds counted were only five: St Cruz, St Andre, Cuncolim, Benaulim, and Navelim. By end of the day, all the 16 MGP strongholds were counted against only eight UGP bastions. In spite of this, Two Leaves were leading by 7802. Even in the remaining eight MGP strongholds, Two Leaves garnered 23 per cent of the votes. In contrast, the Flower got barely 9 per cent of the votes in the five UGP strongholds. Counting stopped at 8.30 pm, leaving the jubilant Maharashtrawadi camp nervous.</p>
  <p>Two major cities remained to be counted. First, the port town of Vasco, dominated by a mixed population of workers who had moved from the New Conquests and migrant workers from outside Goa. The second was the commercial city of Margao. It was considered to be the fortress of Hindu and Christian Brahmins, but it also had many small traders belonging to the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, known as the Bazarkar Mandalli. Two Christian-dominated constituencies of Curtorim and Cortalim, both within Salcete, a Christian majority taluka, were also yet to be counted.</p>
  <p>Only Mormugao showed a vertical division of opinion; 49 per cent for merger and 51 per cent opposing it. It was a complete rout in the other three constituencies. Two Leaves bagged 93 per cent of the votes in Curtorim, 89 per cent in Cortalim, and 70 per cent in Margao. Its graph kept zooming up, increasing the lead to 34,000.</p>
  <p>GOA: OPINION POLL VERDICT</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>Opinion (Symbol)</th>
  <th>Votes</th>
  <th>%</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Anti-Merger (Two Leaves)</td>
  <td>172191</td>
  <td>55.48</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Merger (Flower)</td>
  <td>138170</td>
  <td>45.52</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Margin</td>
  <td>34021</td>
  <td>9.96</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Valid</td>
  <td>310361</td>
  <td>79.91</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Invalid</td>
  <td>7272</td>
  <td>1.87</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Polling</td>
  <td>317633</td>
  <td>81.78</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Voters</td>
  <td>388392</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>So certain was the victory for Two Leaves, that Chief Minister Dayanand Bandodkar did not even turn up at the counting centre on the third day. His party colleague Atchyutrao Usgaonkar has written that he found Bhau playing cricket with his grandchildren with a toy bat at home when he went to visit him soon after the result. Apparently, Bandodkar had predicted the result.[^16]</p>
  <p>It was on 19 December 1961 that Goa was liberated from Portuguese rule. On 19 January 1967, it celebrated yet another liberation of sorts, with 55.48 per cent of Goa’s electorate rejecting the proposal to be part of a bigger state. Nearly half – 45.52 per cent – had voted for the merger. A little less than 10 per cent – 34,021 votes – had made the BIG difference.</p>
  <h2 id="lions-retain-goa">Lions Retain Goa</h2>
  <p>Like any exciting football match, even in the Opinion Poll people still remember the constituencies of Curtorim (93%), Cortalim (89%), Margao (69%) and Mormugao (51%), the last four seats which were counted on the third day. This simply fired up the Identity graph. Many newspapers also made special mention of some constituencies in the Old Conquests, like Benaulim (94%) and Cuncolim (84%). Overall, it was a reverse trend. Unlike 16 seats won by the MGP in the 1963 Assembly election, the Two Leaves won 16 seats in the Opinion Poll. Four more from the MGP bastions: Curchorem, Quepem, Siolim, and Mapusa. The 16 versus 12 ratio of the 1963 election had turned to 12 versus 16 in the Opinion Poll!</p>
  <p>But in reality, this was not enough to win the Opinion Poll. The huge amount of votes in the Old Conquests and especially the Christian-dominated UGP bastions was an expected trend. It was only one lakh out of the total 3.17 lakhs of votes polled. Hardly one-third. Because even in the 12 UGP seats, the Flower of Merger had polled nearly half of the votes: 49 per cent. It was not at all a one-sided affair. And certainly not enough to win the Opinion Poll.</p>
  <p>OPINION POLL 1967: VOTES &amp; MARGIN MGP STRONGHOLDS</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>No</th>
  <th>Constituency</th>
  <th>Polling</th>
  <th>Flower</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>Two Leaves</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>Margin</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  <td>%</td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  <td>%</td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1</td>
  <td>Curchorem</td>
  <td>12281</td>
  <td>5425</td>
  <td>44</td>
  <td>6856</td>
  <td>56</td>
  <td>-1431</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Quepem</td>
  <td>7664</td>
  <td>3447</td>
  <td>45</td>
  <td>4217</td>
  <td>55</td>
  <td>-770</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>3</td>
  <td>Siolim</td>
  <td>11451</td>
  <td>5583</td>
  <td>49</td>
  <td>5868</td>
  <td>51</td>
  <td>-285</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Mapusa</td>
  <td>11748</td>
  <td>5859</td>
  <td>50</td>
  <td>5889</td>
  <td>50</td>
  <td>-30</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Sanguem</td>
  <td>9060</td>
  <td>4560</td>
  <td>50</td>
  <td>4500</td>
  <td>50</td>
  <td>60</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>6</td>
  <td>Sattari</td>
  <td>9479</td>
  <td>4974</td>
  <td>52</td>
  <td>4505</td>
  <td>48</td>
  <td>469</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Canacona</td>
  <td>10454</td>
  <td>5832</td>
  <td>56</td>
  <td>4622</td>
  <td>44</td>
  <td>1210</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>8</td>
  <td>Shiroda</td>
  <td>10534</td>
  <td>6369</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>4165</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>2204</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>9</td>
  <td>St. Estevam</td>
  <td>11537</td>
  <td>6903</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>4634</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>2269</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>10</td>
  <td>Tivim</td>
  <td>9636</td>
  <td>6110</td>
  <td>63</td>
  <td>3526</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>2584</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>11</td>
  <td>Pale</td>
  <td>9973</td>
  <td>6305</td>
  <td>63</td>
  <td>3668</td>
  <td>37</td>
  <td>2637</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Pedne</td>
  <td>8271</td>
  <td>5967</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>2304</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>3663</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>13</td>
  <td>Ponda</td>
  <td>11172</td>
  <td>8082</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>3090</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>4992</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>14</td>
  <td>Mandrem</td>
  <td>12760</td>
  <td>8993</td>
  <td>70</td>
  <td>3767</td>
  <td>30</td>
  <td>5226</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>15</td>
  <td>Bicholim</td>
  <td>9924</td>
  <td>7741</td>
  <td>78</td>
  <td>2183</td>
  <td>22</td>
  <td>5558</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>16</td>
  <td>Marcaim</td>
  <td>10079</td>
  <td>8408</td>
  <td>83</td>
  <td>1671</td>
  <td>17</td>
  <td>6737</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>166023</td>
  <td>100558</td>
  <td>61</td>
  <td>65465</td>
  <td>39</td>
  <td>35093</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>OPINION POLL 1967: VOTES &amp; MARGIN</p>
  <p>UGP STRONGHOLDS</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>No</th>
  <th>Constituency</th>
  <th>Polling</th>
  <th>Flower</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>Two Leaves</th>
  <th></th>
  <th>Margin</th>
  <th></th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td></td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  <td>%</td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  <td>%</td>
  <td>Votes</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>1</td>
  <td>Curtorim</td>
  <td>13473</td>
  <td>926</td>
  <td>7</td>
  <td>12547</td>
  <td>93</td>
  <td>11621</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Benaulim</td>
  <td>11398</td>
  <td>629</td>
  <td>6</td>
  <td>10769</td>
  <td>94</td>
  <td>10140</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>3</td>
  <td>Cortalim</td>
  <td>11787</td>
  <td>1376</td>
  <td>12</td>
  <td>10411</td>
  <td>88</td>
  <td>9035</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Cuncolim</td>
  <td>10854</td>
  <td>1774</td>
  <td>16</td>
  <td>9080</td>
  <td>84</td>
  <td>7306</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Navelim</td>
  <td>13416</td>
  <td>3061</td>
  <td>23</td>
  <td>10355</td>
  <td>77</td>
  <td>7294</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>6</td>
  <td>St. Cruz</td>
  <td>12920</td>
  <td>4311</td>
  <td>33</td>
  <td>8609</td>
  <td>67</td>
  <td>4298</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Margao</td>
  <td>10398</td>
  <td>3241</td>
  <td>31</td>
  <td>7157</td>
  <td>69</td>
  <td>3916</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>8</td>
  <td>St. Andre</td>
  <td>11520</td>
  <td>3930</td>
  <td>34</td>
  <td>7590</td>
  <td>66</td>
  <td>3660</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>9</td>
  <td>Calangute</td>
  <td>13074</td>
  <td>4928</td>
  <td>38</td>
  <td>8146</td>
  <td>62</td>
  <td>3218</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>10</td>
  <td>Aldona</td>
  <td>12309</td>
  <td>4700</td>
  <td>38</td>
  <td>7609</td>
  <td>62</td>
  <td>2909</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>11</td>
  <td>Panaji</td>
  <td>10420</td>
  <td>4175</td>
  <td>40</td>
  <td>6245</td>
  <td>60</td>
  <td>2070</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>12</td>
  <td>Mormugao</td>
  <td>15726</td>
  <td>7654</td>
  <td>49</td>
  <td>8072</td>
  <td>51</td>
  <td>418</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>147295</td>
  <td>40705</td>
  <td>28</td>
  <td>106590</td>
  <td>72</td>
  <td>65885</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>The surprise swing of votes in the New Conquests played the magic. The pro-merger camp never expected such a dramatic shift in votes. It was not Curchorem, Quepem, Siolim, and Mapusa alone where Two Leaves polled between 50 to 56 per cent votes. Even in Sanguem, the margin of Flower was hardly 60 votes. It was 50:50. The hard core Lions even in Sattari (48%), Canacona (44%) as well as Shiroda and St Estevam (40% each) preferred Two Leaves.</p>
  <p>Yet another interesting phenomenon stunned the mergerists. In the 1963 Assembly election, the anti-merger UGP could not find candidates to field in Pernem, St Estevam, Madkai, and Shiroda. But in the Opinion Poll, these four constituencies fetched nearly 13,000 votes in favour of Two Leaves. It was 40 per cent in St Estevam and even 17 per cent in Madkai, where Bhau had polled a record 93 per cent votes in the bye-election. Compared to the 1963 Assembly poll, 11 out of 16 MGP strongholds went against Bhau and his agenda of merging Goan identity into Maharashtra. The only huge rise was in Ponda, 63 per cent more. Then it was St Estevam (25 per cent more), Sattari (24 more), Pernem (23 more) and Mandrem (mere 3 per cent more). Hard-core Lions in the rest of the 11 constituencies, mainly the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, tore the petals of the Flower into pieces.</p>
  <p>And in the 12 UGP strongholds, the percentages of Two Leaves surpassed the UGP votes of 1963 everywhere. Cuncolim (39 per cent more), Curtorim (35 more) and Benaulim (27 per cent more) were at the forefront. This was a clear indication that the anti-merger trend was almost a state-wide phenomenon. It was neither Hindu-Christian, Old vs New Conquests, nor Hindu Brahmins versus Hindu Bahujan Samaj.</p>
  <h2 id="the-agony-and-the-ecstasy">The Agony And The Ecstasy</h2>
  <p>It may have been with a slender margin of 10 per cent, but Goans had opted to retain their distinct identity. The promerger camp was fuming. To keep the situation under control, the Lt Governor imposed Section 144 CrPC throughout Goa for seven days. People celebrating the victory were lathi-charged and tear-gassed. Two truckloads of people were detained. Dayanand Bandodkar humbly accepted the people’s verdict. But he also told the press: “<em>Today, we have lost the battle, but not the war. I am sure we will win the war. We lost because the pro-merger camp was not united.</em>”</p>
  <p>But he did not take the war ahead. In fact, in the newly constituted Assembly of 1967, the MGP supported the resolution urging the Centre to grant statehood for Goa. It was passed unanimously. But to actually gain statehood, Goa had to wait for two more decades. After Konkani was made Goa’s official language, the Congress government led by Rajiv Gandhi granted statehood to Goa on 30 May 1987.</p>
  <p>The Opinion Poll proved Nehru’s contention that Goans were indeed Ajeeb. In the first Assembly election held in 1963, the Goans wiped out the Congress and elected the MGP, representing the Hindu Bahujan Samaj, with 16 seats. The UGP got 12 seats. In the 1967 Opinion Poll, Goans defeated the MGP’s cause of merger. This time, 16 constituencies voted against the merger, and only 12 for.</p>
  <p>But when a fresh Assembly election was held three months later, on 28 March 1967, the same Goans voted MGP leader Bhausaheb Bandodkar back to power, once again with 16 seats. The ‘victorious’ UGP camp was split into two groups due to internal differences between Dr Sequeira and Dr Alvaro de Loyola Furtado. Dr Sequeira’s UGP was back, but once more as Leader of the Opposition, with only 12 seats. The Congress didn’t even contest.</p>
  <p>Chief Minister once again, Bandodkar attended a felicitation function in Sangli a few months later. There, a local leader asked him at an informal get-together: “What made you lose the Opinion Poll when you are so popular?” The CM instantly replied with a smile: “Bhau (me) made me lose the Opinion Poll”. He explained how his opponents had exploited his personal popularity to create a false narrative and defeat the pro-merger point of view. Ajeeb logic of Bhau to justify the victory of independent-minded Goans in the Opinion Poll!</p>
  <p>The Opinion Poll, the only plebiscite held in the country, is an object lesson in Indian democracy. It simply cannot be equated with an election to the Assembly or Lok Sabha, where parties or individual candidates matter. Opinion is different. To sort out vexed public issues, a properly conducted referendum is the only solution. The country needs to learn a lesson from Goa!</p>
  <p>The Opinion Poll also set an electoral culture in Goa. It made people think and vote. Since then, the culture continues. By and large, they never vote blindly or by falling prey to the usual electoral tactics of caste, religion, money, or muscle power. People know that they can make the situation upside down if they think and vote. The only tragedy of Goa’s politics is that the thinking pattern has shifted from performance to delivery. It sometimes doesn’t matter if the candidate is a defector, smuggler, rapist, or highly corrupt, as long as he “delivers”. Perhaps educated Goan voters are thinking on the wrong lines</p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा, पान 23</li>
  <li>Governor’s Address to the Assembly, 13 January 1964</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 21 October 1964</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 1 November 1964</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 1 November 1964</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 3-4 November</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 6 November 1964</li>
  <li>गोमंतक, डॉ􀇛 सि कैरांची कोलांटउडी, 9 नोव्हेंबर 1964</li>
  <li>गोमंतक, 2 व 6 नोव्हेंबर 1964</li>
  <li>Narayan Rajan &amp; D’Cuz Sharon; Triumph of Secularism: Battle of the Opinion Poll in Goa, P 15</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 8-9 November 1964</li>
  <li>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 2 December 1966</li>
  <li>The Navhind Times, 9 &amp; 10 December 1966</li>
  <li>गोमंतक; 14 जानेवारी 1964</li>
  <li>उसगांवकर अच्युत; आमचे भाऊ (सहकाऱ्या च्या दृष्टि कोनातून भाऊसाहेब) पान 223</li>
  </ol>
</body>
</html>
