<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: The Revolutionary Election</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="css/chapter.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-10">Chapter 10</h3>
  <h1 id="the-revolutionary-election">The Revolutionary Election</h1>
  <p>Differences within the Congress started coming to the fore with the beginning of the election process and the releasing of the party manifestos. The party preferred to play with words on the most debatable issue of Goa’s merger in order to please both the camps, and invited wrath from both the sides. On the issue of merger, the manifesto stated:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>The Government of India has made it clear that the future of Goa and whether it should merge into the adjoining territory of Maharashtra will be ultimately decided according to the wishes of the people of Goa. For the present this question does not arise as we have to stabilise and strengthen the economy and facilitate the changes that are taking place because of the integration of Goa in the Indian Union.</em><a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The UGP camp wrote lengthy articles in newspapers, cutting Congress to the size, by asking varied questions, about Who, When and How? Who are these people who would decide? Goans living in Goa or also Goans living outside Goa? And will Goans living in Goa also include people from Maharashtra and other states living in Goa? When will this be decided? Later, means after 5 months? 5 years? 50 years, or more? And how would it be decided? By means of a plebiscite?<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
  <p>The Congress kept mum.</p>
  <p>On the other hand, <em>Gomantak</em> carried the news of the manifesto as an eight-column headline, claiming that the Congress has finally agreed to merge Goa into Maharashtra and has left the decision to the people, linking it directly to the forthcoming election.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> The AICC, on the day the election manifesto was approved in Delhi on 2 October 1963, had made it clear that the future of Goa would not be an election issue.<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> Still, it was made an election issue by the mergerists. Amidst the confusion, the pro-merger camp within the Congress dashed off to the national capital and met Nehru, pressing for immediate decision on the issue of merger. They were furious because the original draft sent by the manifesto committee chairman Adv Pandurang Mulgaonkar had been altered by Purushottam Kakodkar by sending a counter note. His note was included in the manifesto.[^5] The delegation led by Dr Pundalik Gaitonde included Adv Gopal Apa Kamat, Anthony D’Souza and Madhav Bir. Due to this, AICC General Secretary K K Shah came down to Goa on 12 October to pacify the party functionaries.</p>
  <p>While claiming that the confusion has been resolved, Shah told the media that he also met the MGP and the UGP leaders and even they were convinced about the stand taken by the Congress. This enraged the UGP and Dr Jack de Sequeira and Dr Melicio Fernandes clarified that they had never met Shah and that they stood by the party’s demand of Statehood for Goa.<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
  <p>Bhausaheb Bandodkar admitted to having met Shah, but did not disclose what transpired in the meeting. However, Waman Radhakrishna narrates a completely different version of this meeting. According to him, Bhau was kept waiting by Shah at Hotel Mandovi, where he was deliberating with his party colleagues like Kamat, Mulgaonkar, etc. After a long wait, he was called inside at the request made by <em>Gomantak</em> Editor B D Satoskar to the Congress leaders. He saw Bhau sitting restlessly in the lobby and intervened. But Bhau was apparently furious. He told Shah and the local Congress leaders that he had come there with a plan to join their party, but now he has changed his mind after the humiliating treatment he received from the local and national Congress leaders.<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  <p>During this visit, Goa’s leading mine owners like Shantilal Khushaldas, Vasudev Salgaoncar, Pandurang Timble and Dempo also met Shah.</p>
  <p>On the other hand, the PSP leaders from Maharashtra started pressing for the immediate merger of Goa into Maharashtra, which embarrassed the Congress further.</p>
  <h2 id="congress-embraces-the-mighty-bhatkars">Congress Embraces The Mighty <em>Bhatkars</em></h2>
  <p>While the manifesto controversy was dying down, another big controversy arose with the Central Parliamentary Board releasing the first list of the Congress candidates on 30 October 1963. Prominent among them was Goa’s biggest mine owner and landlord Vaicuntrao Dempo, who was allocated a ticket from Pernem. There were also some small landlords chosen to be the candidates, contrary to what Nehru had announced during his Goa visit. Also, cleverly, some of the mergerists were allotted constituencies over which they had no hold while the anti-mergerists had comfortable constituencies for them.</p>
  <p>The other candidates included 18 freedom fighters: Lucio Rodrigues (Siolim), Dr Jose Francisco Martins (Aldona), Atmaram Karmalkar (Mapusa), Mitra Bir (Tivim), Gopal Apa Kamat (Bicholim), Pandurang Mulgaonkar (Pale), Jaykrishna Shirodkar (Sanguem), Dr Vinayak Mayenkar (Ponda), Ravindra Kelekar (Madkai), Shankar Sardesai (Shiroda), Alvaro Pereira (St Estevam), Anthony D’Souza (Panaji), Tukaram Kankonkar (St Cruz), Dattatray Deshpande (Mormugao), Ligorio Cota Carvalho (Cortalim), Laxmikant Bhembre (Margao), Joao Cabral (Curtorim), Purushottam Kakodkar (Curchorem) and Dr Ram Hegde (Quepem).<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <p>The list also included other candidates like Shivram Azgaonkar (Mandrem), Rudolph D’Mello (Calangute), Baburao Hirbarao Desai (Sattari), Maria Elvina Pinto Menezes (St Andre), Irene Barros (Benaulim), Irene Fereira (Cuncolim), Bernardo do Reis (Navelim) and Shivram Fondu Naik Desai (Canacona).<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8" role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
  <p>The real shock to the Congressmen was Vaicuntrao Dempo, who did not fit the criteria laid down by the party to choose candidates. <em>Gomantak</em>, in its editorial, tore into the Congress party. B D Satoskar pointed out that the pro-mergerist candidates were allotted seats contrary to their choice of the constituency they had mentioned in the application form. Secondly, he observed that the major criteria of participation in the Goa independence movement had been blatantly violated by allotting tickets to the opportunist bootlickers of the Portuguese. He also alleged that the Congress had accommodated them in the party fold in order to prevent them from joining the UGP.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> (This clearly suggested that Goa’s <em>Bhatkars</em> were rallying around the UGP.)</p>
  <p>Though neither <em>Gomantak</em> nor any other prominent daily had named anyone in particular, it was crystal clear that the prime target was Dempo. It was also because he had been elected as one of the three Deputados (Member of Parliament) in the Portuguese Parliament for a four-year term from 1961 to 1965, before Liberation.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> `The history of the loyalty of the Dempo family with the Portuguese was an open book. His great grandfather Guiridora, known fondly as Guiri-bab, was</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p>“honoured by the Portuguese with a title, Cavalier of the Land for Valour, Loyalty and Merit" in 1869. Another illustrious Dempo forefather was Guiri-bab’s nephew, Rayu-bab. It was he who was decorated with a baronetcy by the Portuguese (Barao, baron in Portuguese).”<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The reaction this time was more antagonistic. Within five days, 18 prominent Congressmen resigned from the party’s primary membership in protest of the selection of candidates, including two candidates: Anthony D’Souza (also the GPCC Secretary) and Dr Ram Hegde. Their resignation letters stated that the Parliamentary Board had betrayed the basic aspirations of the people of Goa, bypassing the pledge of socialism and the ultimate goal of the merger; and that the election made the battle easier for the established reactionary and anti-national forces. The letter also hinted at tickets being allotted to those who were in good books with the Portuguese establishment till yesterday.</p>
  <p>The other 16 members who resigned were GPCC vice president Narayan Naik, the President of Goa Chamber of Commerce and Industry Madhavrao Talaulikar, businessmen Bhagwant Naik, Damodar Kashinath Naik and Prabhakar Angle, Adv Vishwanath Lawande, Dattaram Desai, Punaji Achrekar, Manju Gaonkar, Zotico D’Souza, M S Prabhu, A S Naik, Shrirang Karmali, Tulshidas Malkarnekar, Prabhakar Ghodge and even Madhav Bir, whose wife Mitra was allotted the ticket from Tivim.</p>
  <p>Shah had to rush down to Goa within a month, on 9 November, hardly two days before the former union home minister Lal Bahadur Shastri was scheduled to launch the election campaign. He along with Mohan Dharia and G B Nevalkar succeeded in working out an amicable solution to try and end the crisis. But only half of the protesters withdrew their resignations after exchanging their constituencies.</p>
  <p>Accordingly, Madhav Bir was given the ticket in Tivim instead of his wife Mitra and Anthony D’Souza withdrew from the fray, paving the way for Alvaro Pereira to shift from St Estevam to Panaji. The other exchanges were Laxmikant Bhembre from Margao to Sanguem, Jaikrishna Shirodkar from Sanguem to Madkai, Ravindra Kelekar from Madkai to Margao, Shankar Sardesai from Shiroda to St Estevam and Dr Ram Hegde from Quepem to Shiroda. Anthony D’Souza and Tulshidas Malkarnekar declared that they would work for the party. Businessmen Madhavrao Talalulkar, Damodar Kashinath Naik, and Bhagwant Naik also withdrew their resignations.</p>
  <p>Meanwhile, the Bombay MGM publicly appealed to all those who had resigned to join the MGP, Goa. Accordingly, the remaining nine including Prabhakar Angle joined the MGP. Four of them were given tickets by the MGP: Punaji Acharekar from Calangute, Narayan Naik from Panaji, Vishwanath Lawande from St Andre, and Dattaram Desai from Quepem. Interestingly, except for Dattaram Desai, the other three neo-MGP stalwarts lost the battle to the UGP candidates. Zotica D’Souza, M S Prabhu, A S Naik, and Shrirang Karmali did not contest, but joined the MGP.</p>
  <p>The Congress list was further modified twice. In Canacona, Shivram Fondu Naik Desai was replaced by Ganaba Desai. Moreover, Dr Vinayak Mayenkar was shifted from Ponda to Quepem to accommodate mine owner and landlord Madhavrao Talaulikar. The much bigger blow to the Congress was the dropping of Shivram Azgaonkar, perhaps the only Scheduled Caste candidate, to give the ticket of Mandrem to Raoraje Deshprabhu, yet another pro-Portuguese mighty landlord, who would often proudly display the honorific Portuguese title of Visconde de Pernem conferred upon the family of Porobo Dessai since 1893. During the Republic, in the 1919 election when Luis de Menezes Braganza had led the Boycott Election campaign, Vasudev Porobo Desai Deshprabhu was one of the government-backed candidates elected to the Legislative Council from the New Conquests.<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  <p>These developments, perhaps at the behest of Purushottam Kakodkar, caused a distancing of the Nehru-loving Goans from the Congress. Murmurs began among the masses about the economic background of the Congress candidates. No doubt the party had a maximum number of freedom fighters, but most of them were also Saraswat Brahmins and quite a few landlords. Comparatively, hardly five candidates belonged to the non- Brahmin Bahujan Samaj.</p>
  <h2 id="bhau-enters-the-poll-fray">Bhau Enters The Poll Fray</h2>
  <p>With tickets being given to the big <em>Bhatkars</em>, mine owners and pro-Portuguese elements, the disappointed political activists had started gathering around the MGP as well as the UGP. It is not true that Bhau Bandodkar, the MGP president by then, did not want to contest elections. In fact his was the first candidature announced by the party: the Lok Sabha ticket from the Panaji (North Goa) constituency.</p>
  <p>Later on, this man, having little political ambition, compromised his own seat to strike a pre-poll alliance with the Praja Socialist Party. The Panaji Lok Sabha seat was won by Peter Alvares of the PSP. Similarly, in Sattari and Ponda, the MGP decided to support the PSP candidates. Jaisingrao Venkatrao Rane and Gajanan Raikar were elected.</p>
  <p>Bhau and his charged cadres started choosing candidates from among the Bahujan Samaj. Most of them were unknown faces beyond their villages or constituencies. They were young or middle-aged teachers, lawyers, small traders, other professionals and even illiterate farmers, either from the middle class or lower middle class. Compared to the Congress candidates, only nine of the MGP candidates were freedom fighters: P P Shirodkar (Siolim), Shambhu Palienkar (Tivim), Narayan Naik (St Cruz), Vishwanath Lawande (St Andre), Vasant Velingkar (Madkai), Tony Fernandes (Sanguem), Dattaram Desai (Quepem), Vithal Subray Karmali (Curchorem) and Venkatesh Verenkar (Cortalim). Six among them won the election. Narayan Naik, Vishwanath Lawande, and Venkatesh Verenkar did not make it.</p>
  <p>Similarly, an impression was created that the MGP was an anti-Brahmin party. But Bhau and his associates had chosen almost eight Saraswat Brahmins, who were progressive in their thoughts and firmly believed in the Land to the Tiller demand. Some of them were even small <em>Bhatkars</em> in their ancestral villages. These included Atchutrao Usgaonkar (Pale), Govind Dhume (Panaji), Vishwanath Lawande (St Andre), Mukund Shinkre (Ponda), V S Karmali (Curchorem), Ranganath Santu Kamat (Navelim), Govind Prabhu (Cuncolim) and Vishwambhar Salkar (Mormugao). Usgaonkar and Karmali among them were elected while Shinkre was elected as the South Goa MP after the Ponda seat was allotted to the PSP.</p>
  <p>Two among them were Christians, Minguel Rodrigues (Benaulim) and Tony Fernandes (Sanguem), also a freedom fighter who was elected. The MGP had also fielded Ashraf Aga from Sattari, but he was unofficially withdrawn after the MGPPSP alliance was struck. Despite this, the popular Aga polled 29 per cent votes, next to the winner Jaisingrao Rane of the PSP, their own ally.</p>
  <p>But the most important and unique characteristic of the MGP, unlike the Congress or the UGP, was that 19 of their total 27 candidates were from the Bahujan Samaj and 17 among them did not carry any additional label as a freedom fighter or being a Christian or a Muslim. They were common men, chosen from the masses.</p>
  <p>In fact, the most interesting anecdote shared with me was by Adv Ramakant Khalap, who succeeded Bhau in Mandrem after his sudden death in 1973. He went to meet former MGP MLAs to seek their blessings and this is what Kashinath Shetgaonkar, the Pernem MLA in the first Assembly and an uneducated farmer, told him:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“I was ploughing my field and a jeep suddenly stopped near the bandh. Two men got down, called me, and told that Bhau Bandodkar had called me to Panaji. I had heard of Bhau but had never met him personally. Wondering why I was suddenly called, I went home, changed my clothes and sat in the jeep. When I was introduced to Bhau, he told me that I would be the MGP candidate. It was an absolute surprise to me when he told me that I would have to fight against Vaicuntrao Dempo, Goa’s mighty landlord and a mine owner. Hesitantly, I surrendered to Bhau’s insistence. Never in my life I had contested any election, even the recently held Panchayat election. But when we started moving around, I was utterly astonished with the response we were getting. And then, I was declared elected, polling almost half of the votes. Dempo could poll only one third. We had defeated the Bhatkar.</em>”</p>
  </blockquote>
  <h2 id="bhatkars-ride-over-the-ugp"><em>Bhatkars</em> Ride Over The UGP</h2>
  <p>Diametrically opposite to this was the scenario in the UGP. The <em>Bhatkar</em> community of Goa was rallying around the UGP by riding the wave of keeping Goa separate, preserving the Konkani language, and defeating Nehru’s Congress as well as the Hindu Bahujan Samaj. The party contested 24 seats out of 28 in Goa. No candidates were fielded in four constituencies of the New Conquests: Pernem, St Estevam, Madkai, and Shiroda.</p>
  <p>Among these, 16 were Christians, seven Hindus and one Muslim, Shaikh Kadar (Curchorem). Also, 10 among them were upper caste Brahmins including four Hindu <em>Bhatkars</em> as well as seven from Chardo (Kshatriya) community including Tatoba Rane, a Hindu Khashe, from Sattari. Almost 12 among them were wealthy <em>Bhatkars</em> from both the religions. All the 16 constituencies of Christian-dominated Old Conquests were represented by wealthy <em>Bhatkars</em> from Brahmin or Chardo communities. Only four among them were freedom fighters: John M de Souza (Calangute), Shivaji Dubhashi (Bicholim), Cristovao Furtado from Chinchinim (Sanguem), and Enio Pimenta (Curtorim).</p>
  <p>Former independent MLA and political analyst Adv Radharao Gracias tells me that it was a tradition in the 1960s and ‘70s that elections were contested by educated and rich people. The lower class Christians, especially from the Sudir community, never ever dreamt of contesting elections. Perhaps this could be the impact of the Portuguese system where only Portuguese-speaking upper class persons who could pay three times more tax than the common men (not women) were eligible to contest elections to the Portuguese Parliament, Goa Legislative Council, or the Camara Municipal.</p>
  <p>The wealthy <em>Bhatkars</em> included Alvaro da Loyola Furtado, Dr Jack de Sequeira, Maurelio Furtado, Urminda Lima Leitao, Orlando Lobo, Dr Luis Proto Barbosa, Enio Pimenta, John de Souza as well as Vasudev Sarmalkar, Sadashiv Desai, Tatoba Rane, and Shivaji Dubhashi.</p>
  <p>The UGP, till it existed, was always supported by Christians at large as well as the Brahmin <em>Bhatkars</em> from the Hindu community, even in the New Conquests. MGP activists like my father and some of his associates in Canacona, who were also Brahmin <em>Bhatkars</em>, were humiliated by other Brahmin <em>Bhatkars</em> who were dead against the MGP policy of Land to the Tiller.</p>
  <p>My father and a small group who were campaigning among the illiterate farmers not to give more than one-sixth of their produce to the <em>Bhatkar</em> after the Land to the Tiller Act was enforced, were dubbed as ‘Latan Sabha’, as they were carrying a lantern to move from house to house. Later on, these Hindu Brahmin <em>Bhatkars</em> shifted to the Congress when the UGP split into the Janata Party and the Congress. Now, the majority of them are with the BJP. Politically, they opposed the merger, supported Konkani but used only Marathi even in the temple administration, where they are the Mahajans. For them, perhaps, the prime agenda was Land to the Tiller linked to the threat of merger and not the language controversy.</p>
  <h2 id="communists-in-disguise">Communists In Disguise</h2>
  <p>The Communists in Goa, who were mainly involved in trade union activities in the port town of Vasco as well as the mining belt at that time, were also a force to reckon with, besides the Congress. Even before the MGP and the UGP came into being, they had been working among the peasants, having formed the Shetkari Paksh (Farmers’ Party).<a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13" role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> However, they did not contest with their Communist symbols but came together as a political front, called Frente Popular. It was a tactical strategy since the people, especially the Christian community, were under the influence of the Church, for whom the Communists were Enemy Number One.</p>
  <p>Though they contested only eight seats, the candidates were true stalwarts who had played a pioneering role in the freedom struggle and were working among the masses even after Goa’s independence. They were Berta Menezes Braganza (Cortalim), Gerald Pereira (Mormugao), George Vaz (Tivim), Narayan Desai (Pernem), Divakar Kakodkar (Curchorem), Chandrakant Kakodkar (Sanguem), Vithal Parab (Mandrem), and J P Braganza (St Cruz).</p>
  <p>In spite of having a clear-cut agenda of ‘Land to the Tiller’ as well as problems of the working class of Goa, their selfless work did not get translated into votes. The party could not garner more than two per cent votes. The only ‘Comrades’ who could get a little public support were Narayan Desai in Pernem (21%) and Gerald Pereira in Mormugao (19%).</p>
  <p>When I was working fulltime in Vasco for Naujawan Bharat Sabha and was moving from house to house in our struggle to legalise the so-called illegal houses of the working class in the port town, I heard a common tale about Gerald Pereira’s election battle in 1963. This simple but intelligent man moving on his feet throughout the constituency was invited by the people to address election meetings in their areas rather than the Frente Popular mobilising the people. He enjoyed so much overwhelming support that his victory was a foregone conclusion. The polling day, 9 December 1963, was a Monday.</p>
  <p>The Sunday Mass held the previous day changed the whole picture overnight. Urminda Lima Leitão e Mascarenhas, a mine owner and a landlord, was elected the UGP MLA by polling 3209 votes. Comrade Pereira was pushed down to the third position, with only 1612 votes!</p>
  <h2 id="the-shinkre-controversy">The Shinkre Controversy</h2>
  <p>It is not the Congress alone that faced a rebellion, but also the MGP. In fact, the party lost their leader, Janardan Shinkre, who had founded the party. He developed serious differences with Bandodkar on the issue of aligning with the PSP. Since the whole local leadership was new and PSP had expertise in electioneering as well as politically experienced workers, Bandodkar accepted the proposal made by PSP leader S M Joshi to offer them one Lok Sabha seat and four Assembly seats. In return, the PSP offered to manage MGP’s whole election campaign. Bhau sacrificed his own Lok Sabha seat to Peter Alvares from Panaji (North Goa) and brought down the proposal to two Assembly seats: Jaisingrao Rane (Sattari) and Gajanan Raikar (Ponda). Immediately, Mukund Shinkre, who was contesting the Assembly poll from Ponda, was fielded as the Lok Sabha candidate from Mormugao (South Goa).<a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14" role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  <p>MGP General Secretary Janardan Shinkre did not agree with this deal. He was also upset because Ashraf Aga was not fielded from Ponda but shifted to Sattari and then out of the fray due to the PSP candidate. In protest, he filed his nomination for Lok Sabha from Panaji, as a dummy candidate to Bhau. It meant that if Bhau withdrew, Janardan could then contest as the official MGP candidate. While Bhau was authorised by the party to decide the candidates, the B Forms of party candidates had to be issued by Shinkre. Bhau immediately moved into action, withdrew Shinkre’s powers to issue B Forms and declared on 18 November 1963 that the MGP had snapped ties with Shinkre.<a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15" role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a> Interestingly, as an independent candidate, Shinkre was allotted for the Lok Sabha election the symbol of ‘Two Leaves’, which later on in the Opinion Poll was the symbol for anti-merger. He forfeited his deposit by polling just 3226 votes from the whole of North Goa.</p>
  <p>However, this last minute controversy over the alliance created a few problems for the MGP-PSP combine. The official Assembly candidates of the PSP − Rane and Raikar − had to contest as Independent candidates, on different symbols. But the alliance managed to turn the pro-merger votes in their favour and win both the seats.</p>
  <p>The only PSP candidates who could withdraw from the fray were P P Pednekar (Siolim), Parulekar (Calangute), Shantaram Dhond (Aldona), and Namdev Haldankar (Mapusa). The other eight candidates remained on the paper as Independent candidates, polling negligible votes. They were Bhanudas Pollji (Mandrem), Vishwas Desai (Pernem), Shivaji Desai (Pale), Shantu [Satudatt] Pal (Bicholim), Pandurang Rane (Tivim), Madhu Shirodkar (St Andre), Mukund Mortu Shet (St Estevam), and Rajaram B Gaonkar (Madkai).</p>
  <p>S M Joshi, a towering personality among the socialists in Maharashtra, not only came for the election campaign but sent his entire team to work behind the curtains for the MGP-PSP alliance.</p>
  <h2 id="national-leaders--regional-media">National Leaders &amp; Regional Media</h2>
  <p>Despite this, the MGP campaign remained a low-key affair since no Maharashtra leader, except Socialists S M Joshi, Madhu Dandavate, and Barrister Nath Pai came down for their campaign. The heart and soul of the Maharashtra Congress leaders was with the MGP, but they could not publicly identify with the party and thus stayed away from the Goa campaign.</p>
  <p>In fact a controversy broke out in Goa when Maharashtra’s influential revenue minister Vasantrao Naik, who later became Maharashtra chief minister, came to Goa with the campaign material for the Congress but stayed at Bandodkar’s bungalow. GPCC President Purushottam Kakodkar objected to it in the party meeting, raising suspicion over the Maharashtra Congress leaders secretly supporting the MGP. Naik however dismissed it, claiming that Bandodkar was his ‘personal friend’.<a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16" role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
  <p>Except for the PSP factor, the MGP as well as the UGP stressed more upon corner meetings in the localities and direct contact with the people. Goa was politically divided between the Old and the New Conquests. The MGP was pulling in crowds in the New Conquests while most of the people in the Old Conquests were fired up by the emotional speeches made, in Konkani, by the UGP leaders.</p>
  <p>But none of these meetings were getting the publicity they deserved in the mainstream media of Goa. The Navhind Times, whose owner Vaicuntrao Dempo was the Congress candidate, had blacked out both the local parties. It was only about the Congress, Congress, and Congress, except for a few mentions of the MGP or the UGP when some political developments took place.</p>
  <p>Similar was the case with A Vida, a Portuguese-English- Romi Konkani daily published from Margao. The owner, Bernardo Do Reis, was contesting as a Congress candidate from Navelim. His daily was filled with news of Congress meetings, detailed profiles of the Congress candidates, and a little news about the UGP or the articles written by its leaders. But not a single line covering the MGP’s election campaign.</p>
  <p>I was always under the impression that the MGP had with it Goa’s leading Marathi daily <em>Gomantak</em> to publicise its views since B D Satoskar, the editor, was a strong proponent of the merger. But <em>Gomantak</em> had also blacked out the MGP, except when the PSP leaders from Maharashtra addressed the public rallies. Some mentions in single-column one-paragraph news reports were sometimes found, about the public meetings held by the MGP. <em>Gomantak</em>, owned by another mine owner, Chowgule, appears to have had a policy similar to The Navhind Times: Congress, Congress, and more Congress!</p>
  <p>The mining lobby of Goa also made attempts to create hurdles in the MGP campaign. Bandodkar was extracting the ore and supplying it to the registered exporter, who was a mine owner. This mine owner suddenly began to delay Bandodkar’s payment, as Bhau was utilising this money for the election campaign. M S Prabhu, who was Goa’s leading insurance agent, had received Rs 40,000 as his commission. He used this towards the campaign expenses. However, at the local level, the finances were managed by the party workers from their own pocket. The MGP had no financial burden of organising the local meetings, so much was the commitment of the villagers.<a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
  <p>There is one incident which Waman Radhakrishna narrates in his book. Bandodkar and Barrister Nath Pai were delayed for a meeting in a certain village in the interior Goa. It was totally dark when they reached the village road. Electricity had not reached the villages at that time. Nath Pai suggested that the meeting be cancelled since there wouldn’t be any crowd. Bhau insisted that the people would be waiting. And suddenly they saw a group of around 200 villagers coming to the main road, with chood (a torch made of coconut leaves) in their hands, to receive their leaders. Nath Pai was flabbergasted with this gesture and support. It was all happening very spontaneously. Similar was the enthusiasm in the UGP camp, especially in the Old Conquests. People were scared that they would become part of Maharashtra and that after the Portuguese had left yet another ‘foreign’ language would be imposed upon them.</p>
  <p>The Congress, a seasoned party in electioneering, was far ahead of both these parties. They were pouring in money, getting experienced cadres from outside for election management and wide publicity. Special teams of senior journalists were brought down from Maharashtra and Delhi for select public rallies. A pageant of national leaders and union ministers was lined up in Goa to woo all kinds of crowds: Hindus, Christians, peasants, workers, migrants etc. Some of them camped in Goa till the campaign ended. The election campaign was launched by former union home minister Lal Bahadur Shastri on 11 November 1963. He came back once again to conclude the campaign in the first week of December, addressing meetings in the villages.</p>
  <p>Congress stalwarts among them were Congress President D Sanjivayya along with Maniben Desai, former Orissa chief minister Biju Patnaik, former union ministers Jagjivan Ram, Morarji Desai, Y B Chavan, S K Patil, Rajya Sabha Deputy Chairperson Violet Alva, her husband and MP Joachim Alva, Mohan Dharia, Kerala Congress leader Dr Henry Austin Fernandes, P K Sawant etc. While each leader was pleading not to make Goa’s merger an election issue, Christian leaders like Fernandes and Alvas were asking Goans not to mix religion with politics. They were not just going to the cities but even visiting the villages, from Pernem to Salcete to Bicholim.</p>
  <p>The most interesting among these were two meetings held in Pernem and Mandrem, from where mighty landlords like Vaicuntrao Dempo and Raoraje Deshprabhu were contesting. Sanjivayya, at a meeting held in Pernem, tried to impress the crowd claiming that Vaicuntrao Dempo has been the supporter of Congress for a long time and how his contribution to the liberation movement was praiseworthy. He also called it ‘mischievous’ to say that the Congress had betrayed the cause of socialism by giving tickets to the landlords and industrialists like Dempo.<a href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18" role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a></p>
  <p>There was a reason for Sanjivayya to reach to this level to convince the Pernem voters. A fortnight before this, K K Shah had been cornered by the voters when he visited Pernem and Mandrem along with the Lok Sabha and Assembly candidates to meet his party workers. Hearing the news, around a thousand Pednekars gathered at the meeting venue and Shah had no other option but to reply to their blunt questions, in Pernem as well as in Mandrem:</p>
  <p><em>How is it that you have given tickets to landlords and capitalists when your profession is that you are working for the poor?</em></p>
  <p>Shah : <em>We adopted such people as candidates in India, also in other states. But we got them bound to our principles and programme. We told them that they must subscribe to tenancy legislation and other legislation which sought to ameliorate the conditions of workers in factories. That is the way Congress wants to bring in the Socialist pattern by stages.</em></p>
  <p>T V Parvate : <em>Deshprabhu and Dempo are wedded to the Congress programme which stands for improving the standard of life of the peasants and workers. In fact Deshprabhu has already granted reasonable rent and security to the peasants, even before Congress brought this legislation.</em></p>
  <p>Dempo : <em>I stand by the programme of the Congress to work for Socialism and to satisfy people’s basic necessities like food, clothing and shelter. I will personally work for it.</em></p>
  <p>Deshprabhu : <em>I have nothing new to tell you. You should take into consideration the services of the Congress to India during the last 75 years and particularly during the last 16 years and decide for yourselves that under Congress rule you would be happy.</em><a href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19" role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
  <p>Neither Dempo nor Deshprabhu stood by the socialist programme of the Congress. In fact, even after the Tenancy and Mundkar Acts were enforced during the MGP regime, over three-fourth of Pernem and its villages still belong to the Deshprabhus. I am told that the tenants still give Khand to the mighty <em>Bhatkar</em> and a receipt is issued to them. The reason is simple. To extend the existing house or to build a new house, the common Pednekar needs to obtain an NOC from the landowner, just as the Sattari people need to do with the land belonging to the Khashe or the Government. The whole land of Pernem still belongs to the <em>Bhatkars</em> even after 60 years of Goa’s independence. They have sold it to the North Indian hoteliers in the coastal belt, and our own Goan politicians have bought land around the proposed Mopa airport.</p>
  <p>Coming back to the campaign of 1963, it was a sheer coincidence that when Sanjivayya was facing flak from the farmers of Pernem due to Dempo and Deshprabhu’s candidatures, Maharashtra-based Congress leader Yeshwantrao Chavan was greeted by the farmers in areas like Bicholim and other places. He was the icon of Goan farmers due to the revolutionary land reforms he had enforced as the first CM of Maharashtra. He was blunt enough to accept the factual position and provide practical solutions to the voters. ln his first rally in Vasco he said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“I liken the Goa election to the churning of the sea by the Gods and the Demons. Just as from that churning emerged the 14 precious jewels including the world-consuming poison, some less vitriolic poison may emerge from this election also. But just as Shankar was found to arrest its spread, the Congress can scotch this poison too.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Whether in Vasco or Panaji, Chavan had to face slogans on the merger issue. But in Bicholim, thousands of people welcomed him by shouting pro-merger slogans. In response, he told the crowd that if and when Goa had to be merged, it would only be in Maharashtra. But the time is not now, you are not going to have a referendum on that point in this election, he said.</p>
  <p>Chavan argued the case of ‘Why Congress’ in his own style. He felt the Congress should be elected to power with a clear majority to foil the demand of a separate State by the United Goans Party. They are not only Christians but also have ‘some Hindus’ with them, he said. According to him, a separate state at this juncture was a dangerous move. In his Panaji rally, he had termed it as an attempt to create a ‘Black Portugal’. He had also assured them full freedom to practice their western culture, music, clothing, food and way of life.</p>
  <p>But the real master stroke was what he said in Bicholim, tilting his argument in favour of the MGP:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“I have heard it said that Congress must be returned to power in order to avail of central aid for development. I am against this spirit of bargaining. Development funds for Goa will be there even if it continues to be a Union Territory directly governed by the Centre or even if, in this election, the Congress government does not come to power…”</em><a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref20" role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The impact of Chavan’s visit was so much that Shah finally took the mergerists head on at a meeting in Calangute, a day before the polling. He reached Calangute at around 7 pm, when a meeting of the mergerists was going on, while his meeting was scheduled 15 minutes later. The mergerists asked him to address the same meeting as a friendly gesture and Shah jumped at it. (The newspaper report does not state if it was the MGP meeting). While justifying the stand taken by the Congress on maintaining Goa as the Union Territory and assuring Rs 100 Crore for its development if Congress is brought to power, he asked the audience:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“Whose advice are you going to take? Mr Yeshwantrao Chavan’s or Mr Dayanand Bandodkar’s"?</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The Navhind Times, who published this incident with this question itself as a headline, reported that the audience shouted: “<em>Of course, Mr Chavan!</em>”</p>
  <h2 id="congress-routed-mgp-ugp-rise">Congress Routed, MGP-UGP Rise</h2>
  <p>And then came D-Day, 9 December 1963, to decide on Chavan or Bandodkar. The response was much more than the Panchayat elections. Over 75 per cent Goans exercised their franchise all across Goa, with women outnumbering men as voters. Long queues were witnessed practically at every booth and Lt Governor Mulk Raj Sachdev personally monitored the election by visiting the polling booths all around Goa.</p>
  <p>The counting began three days later, on 12 December, and ended the next day. By midnight, 15 results were declared, spreading a wave of panic in the Congress camp and making the UGP jubilant. The Congress had not won a single seat in Goa, except one in Daman. The UGP had won nine seats, the MGP took four, and one by an independent in Diu. Dr Jack de Sequeira was the first victor announced in the history of Goa’s first democratic election. In a close encounter, he had defeated MGP candidate Govind Dhume by 414 votes and polled 42 per cent votes. Congress candidate Alvaro Pereira could somehow manage to save his deposit but could not garner more than 21 per cent votes.</p>
  <p>This was the scenario at all the 13 seats of which results were declared. Almost nine Congressmen among them had forfeited their deposits. Except in Mandrem and St Andre, Congress was pushed to the third position in all other constituencies. Eminent freedom fighters like Shankar Sardesai (St Estevam, 641 votes) and Ravindra Kelekar (Madgao, 1113 votes) lost miserably, besides A Vida owner Bernardo do Reis (Navelim, 750 votes) and Irene Barros (Benaulim, 1711 votes). The only person who lost honourably was Vishwanath Lawande (St Andre), in a close fight, by 112 votes.</p>
  <p>The UGP winners were Dr Jack Sequeira (Panaji), Dr Álvaro Loyola dá Furtado (Navelim), Joaquim Arauzo (St Cruz), Vasudev Sarmalkar (Madgao), Maurelio Furtado (Benaulim), Teotónio Pereira (St Andre), Sebastiao Mazarelo (Cuncolim), Enio Pimenta (Curtorim) and John M D’Souza (Calangute).</p>
  <p>But it was not a disappointment for the MGP camp at all. In fact, on the first day itself, the party of the Bahujan Samaj had created history in Goa’s electoral politics. In two constituencies of Pernem taluka, three mighty landlords were defeated miserably by two common men. Vaicuntrao Sinai Dempo (Congress), the landlord and Goa’s leading mine owner, lost by polling only one third of votes (1912) while Kashinath Shetgaonkar, an illiterate farmer, polled half of the votes (3185). Similarly, Raoraje Deshprabhu, the <em>Visconde de Pernem</em>, was pushed down to the third position. He could not manage to get more than 14 per cent votes (1410). Sadhashiv Desai (UGP), another landlord, also could not garner more than 15 per cent votes (1536). Vijay Kamulkar, a teacher, won with a huge margin of over 5000 votes, by polling 65 per cent votes (6663). Indian democracy had shown its real shining colours!</p>
  <p>Besides these, MGP’s leader P P Shirodkar (Siolim) and Dattaram Chopdekar (St Estevam) were also declared victorious. The next day brought shame to the Congress. The MGP became the first ruling party of Goa and the UGP became the prime opposition. The Congress could not win a single seat. The UGP won three more, taking its tally to 12. The MGP-PSP swept the poll, adding 12 more seats to its kitty. With 16 seats out of 30, the Lion was all set to rule Goa, Daman and Diu. The UGP got all its 12 seats from the Old Conquests (15 seats). Besides winning all the 13 seats in the New Conquests, the MGP-PSP combine also won three seats from Bardez: Siolim, Tivim and Mapusa.</p>
  <p>All the dreams of the Congress were shattered. The only respite was one seat, that too from Daman, which was won by Kalidas Patel (7237) in a straight fight by polling 81 per cent votes. The whole ‘secret exercise’ of distributing cabinet berths amongst themselves had gone in vain. Forget winning a seat, nearly two third of their 28 candidates in Goa, 19 to be precise, lost their deposits. The politics of embracing royal landlords and mine owners had boomeranged royally. The pan-India formula of ‘accommodative politics’ of the Congress had proved to be a big flop in Goa, which Nehru had once called a pimple on the face of India!</p>
  <p><em>Source: Election Commission of India</em></p>
  <p>The Diu seat was won by an independent, Mamadali Ravji (1745), by defeating the Congress-supported Independent Puspasen Wandas (1373). Interestingly, the battle in Diu was between four independents, without a single party officially contesting there. In a four-cornered fight, Mamadali became the MLA by polling only 33 per cent votes. The other two Independents Ramji Anjani and Gokal Patel polled 1317 and 844 votes respectively.</p>
  <p>The additional 10 seats won by the MGP on the second day were Raghunath Tople (Mapusa), Shambhu Palienkar (Tivim), Kusumakar Kadkade (Bicholim), Atchut Usgaonkar (Pale), Vasant Velingkar (Madkai), Pundalik Sagun Naik (Shiroda), Tony Fernandes (Sanguem), Ganaba Desai (Canacona), Dattaram Desai (Quepem) and Vithal Subray Karmali (Curchorem).</p>
  <p>The UGP won three more seats: Orlando Lobo (Aldona), Dr Luis Proto Barbosa (Cortalim) and Urminda Lima Leitao Mascarenhas (Mormugao).</p>
  <p>The MGP-PSP combine had also won both the Lok Sabha seats. Peter Alvares (53%) of the PSP had defeated the sitting MP and one of the most eminent freedom fighters Dr Pundalik Gaitonde (16%) of the Congress as well as Umakant Surlakar (29%) of the UGP. Janardan Shinkre, who had revolted against Bhau, polled only 3226 votes − three per cent!</p>
  <p>Mukund Shinkre (39%), who was shifted for the Lok Sabha contest at the last minute due to a tie-up with the PSP was also declared victorious in a tough battle against A D Loyola Furtado (36%) of the UGP. The margin was just 3000 votes. Eminent freedom fighter Laura D’Souza (18%) of the Congress was pushed to third position. This was the first and last victory for the MGP from South Goa. The seat was then won by the UGP, Congress, and even the BJP, but never again by the MGP.</p>
  <h2 id="the-winners--the-losers">The Winners &amp; The Losers</h2>
  <p>The winners of the MGP in the Assembly poll included two Saraswat Brahmins: Atchut Usgaonkar (Pale) and Vithal Subray alias ViSu Karmali (Curchorem), one Christian - Tony Fernandes (Sanguem), and the rest belonging to the non-Brahmin Bahujan Samaj. Though Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru later claimed that the election had taken place on religious lines, the MGP winners belonged to all the three sections, including progressiveminded Brahmins who supported land reforms. In fact, Tony Fernandes was elected from Sanguem, where the Christian population was just 25 per cent. He polled 58 per cent votes.</p>
  <p>The UGP established its mark in the Old Conquests. The ‘Party of Christians and Hindu Brahmins’ won 12 seats of Calangute, Aldona, Panaji, St Cruz, St Andre, Cuncolim, Benaulim, Navelim, Margao, Curtorim, Cortalim, and Mormugao.</p>
  <p>Except for Teotonio Pereira, the Mapusa-based bus operator belonging to the Sudir caste, all other 11 MLAs of the UGP belonged to either Bamonn or Chardo castes, nine of whom were also wealthy <em>Bhatkars</em>, including Vasudev Sarmalkar from Margao. In a bastion of Hindu and Christian Brahmins, Vasudevbab polled 51 per cent votes.</p>
  <p>1963: GOA ASSEMBLY POLL</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>PARTY</th>
  <th>CANDIDATES</th>
  <th>VOTES</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>MGP-PSP</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td>119788</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>UGP</td>
  <td>24</td>
  <td>74081</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>Cong</td>
  <td>29</td>
  <td>41727</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Frente Popular</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>4589</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>PSP ‘Independents’</td>
  <td>8</td>
  <td>410</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>Other Independents</td>
  <td>51</td>
  <td>16603</td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>257198</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p><em>Note:</em></p>
  <ol type="1">
  <li><em>MGP candidates include Ashraf Aga (Sattari) &amp; Mukund Shinkre (Ponda), who were withdrawn later in support of PSP candidates Jaisingrao Rane (Sattari) &amp; Gajanan Raikar (Ponda). MGP did not field candidates in Curtorim. Also in Daman &amp; Diu.</em></li>
  <li><em>UGP did not contest Pernem, Shiroda, Madkai and St Estevam seats in Goa as well as Daman and Diu.</em></li>
  <li><em>The 8 PSP Independents means those who officially did not withdraw but were not given party forms, publicly withdrawn from the fray and remained on the ballot paper as Independents.</em></li>
  </ol>
  <p>Participation in the freedom struggle was also an important criteria laid down by all the parties while choosing their candidates. Altogether 39 freedom fighters had entered the fray from five different parties. From among them, 10 were elected to the first Assembly of Goa and two among them also became ministers in the first MGP government.</p>
  <p>Among them, a maximum number of 18 freedom fighters were fielded by the Congress and six equally towering personalities had entered the fray from Frente Popular. All 24 of them had played an inspirational role to win the ‘Battle of Independence’, but they lost the ‘Battle of Democracy’, along with all other candidates of their parties. However, the MGP could get six freedom fighters elected out of the nine fielded by the party. Both the PSP MLAs were freedom fighters too. A total of eight out of 16. Two among these, Fernandes and Karmali also became ministers.</p>
  <p>The UGP had also fielded four freedom fighters. Among them, only John M D’Souza (Calangute) and Enio Pimenta (Curtorim) could make it to the Assembly. The other two, Shivaji Dubhashi (Bicholim) and Cristovao Furtado (Sanguem) lost the battle to the MGP.<a href="#fn21" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref21" role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a></p>
  <p>The entire battle was fought neither on Hindu-Christian religious lines nor on Brahmin versus Bahujan Samaj caste lines as it appeared to have been projected all these years. There were freedom fighters elected from all the parties including the UGP, which was allegedly termed as pro-Portuguese by their opponents. On the other hand, the most prominent freedom fighters from the Congress and the Frente Popular were defeated.</p>
  <p>There were Christian MLAs elected from Hindu-dominated areas like Tony Fernandes (MGP) from Sanguem and Dr Jack de Sequeira (UGP) from Panaji. In fact the main battle in Sanguem was between two Christians. There were Brahmins elected from constituencies that had a negligible presence of upper castes, as in Atchut Usgaonkar’s case in Pale. Eminent freedom fighters like Dr Ram Hegde, in a straight fight, had lost to a common man like Pundalik Sagun Naik. He polled 74 per cent votes. And the startling outcome in the remote areas like Pernem and Mandrem was that the farming community had taught a lifetime lesson to the mighty landlords and mine owners that electoral literacy had nothing to do with educational illiteracy. It was truly a revolutionary battle that was won in this so-called ‘backward’ border taluka of North Goa.</p>
  <p>Through this fierce battle on economic lines and Goan identity, the new battleground emerged. The first Goa Assembly had some <em>Bhatkars</em> and some Kull and Mundkars. There were Brahmins and upper caste Chardos with <em>Bhatkar</em> mentality as well as some having a progressive outlook for land reforms.</p>
  <p>There were also professionals like lawyers, doctors, teachers, small traders, and even farmers. A perfect combination of crosssections of the society to run the first ever democratically elected Assembly of Goa!</p>
  <p>The core component of the first ever democratic battle of Goa was: The Ownership of Land!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>A Vida; 4 October 1963<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>Loyola Furtado A De; A Vida 20 October 1963<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 4 ऑक्टोबर 1963<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 3 October 1963<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 19 October 1963<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान 18<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>Shirodkar Dr P P; Who’s Who of Freedom Fighters<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 31 October 1963<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; संपादकीय 5 नोव्हेंबर 1963<a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Pais e Martins Sharmila; The Encounter with the Ballot in Colonial Goa (1821-1961) P 314<a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>The House of Dempo website (https://www]:dempos]:com/kalpavriksha-family/)<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>Pais e Martins Sharmila; The Encounter with the Ballot in<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान 18<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान 23<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; 19 नोव्हेंबर 1963<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्तीनंतरचा गोवा, पान 23<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; महाराष्ट्रवादी गोमंतक, स्थापना आणि वाटचाल, पान 25<a href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 5 December 1963<a href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 23 November 1963<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn20" role="doc-endnote"><p>The Navhind Times; 6 November 1963<a href="#fnref20" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn21" role="doc-endnote"><p>Shirodkar Dr P P; Who’s Who of Freedom Fighters<a href="#fnref21" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
