<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Ajeeb Goa: National Mines and Regional Rejects</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:8134eff7-4158-4e4b-b7f2-78d95752ee42" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h3 id="chapter-2">Chapter 2</h3>
  <h1 id="national-mines--regional-rejects">NATIONAL ‘MINES’ &amp; REGIONAL ‘REJECTS’</h1>
  <p>Before getting into the history of Goan polity, let us learn a bit more about the presence of national and regional parties in Goa. In the earlier chapter, we have seen how the Congress party established itself in Goa after getting completely routed in the first three elections. The merger of the UGP’s Babu-Willy faction and the so-called Marathiwadis like Pratapsingh Rane, Dilkhush Desai, Dayanand Narvekar, and Vasu Paik Gaonkar, led to the Congress emerging as a strong political force in Goa. For all practical purposes, it was the union of the MGP and the UGP as well as the Hindus and the Christians. With Goa attaining statehood and the strength of the Assembly rising to 40 after the 1989 election, this national party became the unified front of the regional sentiments of Goa. The MGP became a namesake regional party with its leaders waiting for the ‘royal opportunity’ to become ‘loyal soldiers of the Congress’.</p>
  <p>The ‘UT Mentality’ (of excessive dependence of a union territory on the Central Government) has been deeply rooted in Goan politics right from the day the MGP formed its first government in Goa in 1963. Even after wiping out the Congress in the first election, the first public rally of the MGP held in Margao congratulated the Congress government at the Centre for their victory, claiming that the MGP victory had strengthened the hands of Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Even before he was sworn in as Goa’s first chief minister, Dayanand Bandodkar was all praise for Nehru while refuting the Prime Minister’s allegation that the election had been fought on religious lines.<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> He blamed the local leadership of the Congress for their debacle.</p>
  <p>While contesting the second Assembly election soon after the Opinion Poll, Bhau refused to continue the MGP’s alliance with the PSP. “The PSP got elected in Goa with our support and their MP Peter Alvares criticised the Congress government at the centre in the Lok Sabha. Being a Union Territory (UT), Goa cannot afford to oppose the central government at the Centre,” said Bandodkar.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> The PSP lost all the eight seats it contested independently in 1967. The Socialists polled hardly five per cent votes, 3033 to be precise. Seven of them lost their deposits. Even the sitting MLAs like Jaisingrao Rane (6%) and Gajanan Raikar (2%) could not make any impact.<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
  <h2 id="the-gold-mine-of-congress">The Gold Mine of Congress</h2>
  <p>It was not Shashikala Kakodkar who made the first move to merge the MGP into the Congress. It was Dayanand Bandodkar. A little before his sudden demise in 1973, Bhau had almost finalised the plan to merge his party into the Congress. Uma Shankar Dixit, the influential union minister in the Indira government, had succeeded in mediating the merger. He had agreed to all the three major conditions laid down by Bandodkar: 1) Elections of the Congress party should be held as per the advice of Bandodkar; 2) Maximum candidates of the Congress should come from the <em>Bahujan Samaj</em>; and 3) Christians should have representation in the cabinet.</p>
  <p>However, 12 August 1973 turned out to be a calamitous day for Goa, due to Bhau’s sudden demise. Goa has never witnessed till date such a funeral. The queue of mourners on the day of the funeral extended from his Altinho bungalow near the Circuit House right up to the Panjim Church Square.<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> More than half of Goa, especially in the villages, did not cook their meals as usual that day. We, at school, had a holiday, not joyous but full of tears. The whole state was mourning. The Congress missed gaining a visionary leader and a statesman!</p>
  <p>There was a valid reason why Bandodkar had laid down those three conditions. It was because the Purushottam Kakodkar-led Congress was following the unfair policy of favouring landlords over the <em>Bahujan Samaj</em>. Equally flawed was the policy of fielding freedom fighters who had no roots among the masses of those respective constituencies.</p>
  <p>In 1967, at the Assembly poll held within a month of the Opinion Poll, Congress did not contest. The national party tried to strike a pact with the regional UGP, as a unification of antimergerist forces. However, the talks failed since Dr Jack de Sequeira remained adamant on not sparing UGP’s strongholds. Congress was also hesitant to give a firm assurance that Dr Sequeira would be made the chief minister. The national party then decided that some of the freedom fighter party men would try their luck as independents. But this experiment flopped even more miserably than the previous one. Madhav Bir in Tivim (polled 869 votes), Pandurang Mulgaonkar in Panaji (1051), Jaikrishna Shirodkar in Shiroda (857) and Ligorio Cota Carvalho in Cortalim (1667) fared quite poorly. Former MGP leader and ex-Speaker P P Shirodkar, who was tipped to be the CM, also lost badly in Siolim (354) as an independent candidate.</p>
  <p>But the Congress was still bent upon its 1963 policy when it contested the 1972 election, once again to lose all the seats, except Daman. The freedom fighters who lost were Gopal Apa Kamat in Sattari (1170), Vishwanath Lawande in St Andre (1205), Prafull Priolkar in St Estevam (934), Telo Mascarenhas in Cortalim (1018), and Anthony D’Souza in Mormugao (2816).<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
  <p>And once again, a prominent landlord and another mighty mine owner were given Congress tickets. This time from Pernem, Raghuraje Deshprabhu was fielded, but could not poll more than one third of the votes. MGP candidate Jaisingrao Abasaheb Rane, not from Pernem, defeated him by polling 62 per cent votes. Mine owner Modu Timblo in Margao fared even worse. He lost his deposit by polling hardly 17 per cent of the votes, finishing in third position. Anant alias Babu Naik made his debut in the Assembly on the UGP ticket by polling more than half the votes, 54 per cent.<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
  <p>But this policy changed with the UGP and the MGP leaders taking over the Congress during Indira Gandhi’s regime. The UT mentality obviously helped the Congress to get firmly rooted in Goa as the national party ruled India for 52 long years, from Nehru in 1947 to Manmohan Singh in the first decade of the 21st century, till the Narendra Modi-led BJP took over in 2014. The major break in between was the BJP rule for six years under Atal Bihari Vajpayee from 1998 to 2004, when BJP’s Manohar Parrikar formed two consecutive governments in Goa. Otherwise, India had witnessed minor stints like the post-Emergency Janata rule in 1977, with V P Singh and Chandrashekhar in the ‘90s, and Atal Bihari Vajpayee (BJP) for six days, as well as H D Deve Gouda and I K Gujral in the late ‘90s. These phases did not have any impact on Goan politics.</p>
  <p>The national scenario certainly had an impact on Goa politics in terms of the Congress being the most powerful party in the country, with its blessings and financial support as the central government. Despite facing a series of rebellions as well as defections and changes in their governments, the Congress continued to wield significant power. Even after Goa attained Statehood in 1987, it remained dependent on the Centre till the 10th Finance Commission of 1992, when the Centre cut down financial assistance drastically, in accordance with the Gadgil- Mukherjee formula. In fact, the BJP Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar was the first politician of Goa to prove with his expertise in financial management that Goa could be economically self-sufficient. The Congress till then had not come out of the ‘UT Mentality’, Even today, Goan politicians are demanding a Special Status for Goa on the lines of the North-Eastern states for financial privileges.</p>
  <h2 id="the-era-of-defections">The Era of Defections</h2>
  <p>Defections in Goa did not begin in 1990, when Pratapsingh Rane’s Congress government was toppled within 77 days. The first defection was engineered by Bhausaheb Bandodkar in July 1970 when his government was pushed into a minority due to a revolt by seven MGP men including two ministers and the deputy speaker. He sailed through the vote of confidence by splitting five UGP men from their party and getting them on his side. None of the rebels and defectors from the two parties won in the next election held in 1972.</p>
  <p>The second revolt was faced by Shashikala Kakodkar in 1979, following the violent students’ agitation for 50 per cent bus concession. Two young MGP legislators, Dayanand Narvekar and Dilkhush Desai, moved out first, reducing the MGP strength to 13. The Congress had 10 MLAs, but Shripad Kunkolienkar had no voting right as his election petition was pending before the Supreme Court. The Janata Party had three legislators. An independent candidate from Daman was supporting the MGP and another independent Narayan Fugro from Diu was the Speaker. Fugro saved Shashikala-tai by casting his veto in support of the government when there was a tie during the voting on the budget. But then the Law Minister Shankar Laad also joined the rebels and pushed the Tai government into a clear minority. Then Tai managed to convince Prime Minister Morarji Desai, and got President’s rule imposed on 27 April 1979. She did not allow the rebels to form an alternate government. But the next election of 1980 ended the MGP rule. The rebels joined the Congress and that party came to power.</p>
  <p>The Congress then ruled Goa for the entire decade uninterrupted. The party did face a major revolt led by Dr Wilfred de Souza in September 1983. He split the party with eight MLAs in protest, as his demand for change in the leadership of CM Pratapsingh Rane was not heeded. Dr Willy, who was then the PWD minister in the Rane government, went ahead and formed the Goa Congress party. This was in the background of the threeday retreat in Goa of the CHOGM (Commonwealth Heads of Governments’ Meet) hosted by India from 23 to 29 November 1983. To facilitate the hosting of the retreat of 39 heads of governments from all over the world, the Central Government gifted Goa a bouquet of infrastructural projects worth Rs 430 million, including the Zuari bridge as well as the CHOGM road from Porvorim to Sinquerim via Saligao and Calangute, and other facilities.<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8" role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
  <p>Despite Dr Willy’s clout with a powerful contractors’ lobby, the Goa Congress lost the 1984 Assembly election, except for Luizinho Faleiro, who made his debut in the Goa Assembly from Navelim. Though Dr Willy also lost the election, he along with the support of the MGP and frustrated Madgavkars succeeded in defeating his arch rival in the Congress, Babu Naik. Adv Uday Bhembre, standing as an independent, defeated him in one of the most exciting elections Goa has ever witnessed till date. The Congress was also weakened with Shashikala Kakodkar quitting the Congress and staging a homecoming to the MGP on 20 October and later also quitting the MGP to form her own party, the Bhausaheb Bandodkar Gomantak Party (BBGP). Her fate too was no different from the Goa Congress.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
  <p>The Congress once again swept the 1984 election by winning 18 out of 30 seats and gaining 1.60 lakh votes out of 1.71 lakhs polled by five national parties including the BJP (contesting 16 seats), CPI (5 seats), CPM (4 seats) and Janata Party (3 seats), which they all lost). MGP established itself as the opposition, winning eight seats, besides four independents. The Assembly election was held alongside the national Lok Sabha poll, which was held in the background of the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Riding on a nationwide sympathy wave, the Congress won 404 seats in the 514-seat Lok Sabha. In Goa too the party won both the seats (North: Shantaram Naik, South: Eduardo Faleiro).<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
  <p>However, anti-Rane sentiment began brewing within the Congress even as the mighty Pratapsingh faced a violent agitation for the official language in 1986. This eventually resulted in Dr Willy coming back to his party, and Goa attaining statehood, with 40 Assembly seats. Meanwhile, the Parliament passed the Anti-Defection Act, making it mandatory for a defecting group to be at least one-third of the parent party’s strength in the legislature to split from the party. This development came a little before the 1989 election. There was yet again a state-wide month-long protest in 1988 against the alleged molestation of a teenage employee by the then Speaker Dayanand Narvekar. This agitation brought all the opposition parties together as a front to fight the 1989 election.</p>
  <p>What was its outcome? The Congress reached the edge of a majority by winning 20 seats, while the MGP rose to 18. Rane was in the saddle once again, but only for 77 days. The toppling of Rane by a group of seven MLAs began Goa’s most shameful defection era. The most embarrassing part of this ‘legal defection’ was that the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution (Anti- Defection Act) had authorised the Speaker of the Assembly to sit in a neutral position and judge the legality of defections. But here, the Speaker Dr Luis Proto Barbosa himself led the first legal defection to seize the CM’s chair. The Goa Assembly had to appoint another ‘member of the House’ to decide about the Speaker’s defection. Dr Kashinath Jalmi, who judged this shameful act, ruled that the Speaker could not defect. His judgement was also upheld by the Supreme Court.</p>
  <p>However, this new legal weapon of ‘one-third’ provoked a series of shameless toppling games and rampant defections during the entire term, primarily sponsored by various groups of builders and real estate agents. Goa witnessed seven chief ministers in those five years. Despite this, in the next Assembly election of 1994, the Congress still managed to emerge as the single largest party by winning 18 seats in a hung Assembly. Rane became the CM once again. But after ruling for three years and seven months, he was felled again. This time the Congress rebels were also supported by a four-member BJP group from outside.</p>
  <p>In order to control these defections, the Anti-Defection Act was amended further in 2003, raising the limit of strength from one-third to two-thirds, or to resign and face a by-election. The professional defectors, mainly from the Congress, as well as from other parties, even faced the electorate after seizing the ministerial seat. The helpless voter finally gave up, but rose once again determinedly in 2012 to send the corrupt, opportunist, selfish, and ‘poor’ Congress of ‘rich’ leaders home. The national party, for the first time since 1980, dipped down to a single digit of nine MLAs. The only viable alternative then was Manohar Parrikar, whose BJP finally reached the magic figure of 21 and ruled Goa for five years.</p>
  <p>By 2017, the Narendra-Modi led BJP had established an unbeatable majority in the Parliament in the Lok Sabha poll of 2014, Parrikar had become the defence minister of India, the BJP had showered social schemes with freebies on all sections of the Goan society and had built a well-knit infrastructure of roads, bridges etc.</p>
  <p>Still, in the surprise poll of 2017, Congress once again rose from nine to 17 seats, pushing the BJP from 21 down to a mere 13, in a hung Assembly including three each of the MGP, Goa Forward Party, and independents. Churchill Alemao was the sole NCP man elected. Parrikar was surely stunned by this Ajeeb behaviour of the Goan voter.</p>
  <p>Sitting in a dejected mood with his journalist friend, Parrikar said: “There is no other option other than sitting in the opposition now.” Suddenly his mobile rang, he looked at it, requested his friend to excuse him and went inside his room. Emerging after ten minutes in an upbeat mood, he told the journalist: “We are forming the government.” Now it was the turn of his friend to be stunned. The impossible had turned possible. Amit Shah moved into action, Nitin Gadkari flew down, a couple of helicopters landed in Goa, and Manohar Parrikar became the Chief Minister once again.</p>
  <p>The national leaders had managed to persuade Vijai Sardesai of the GFP as well as Sudin Dhavalikar of the MGP, and the independents, to support the Hindutva party, which they had earlier sworn not to support. Both, Sudin and Vijai, became the deputy chief ministers while their four colleagues became ministers. Independents Rohan Khaunte and Govind Gaude also joined the cabinet.</p>
  <p>The first one to jump out and seize a ministerial berth was ‘loyal Congressman’ Vishwajeet Rane. He quit minutes after taking oath as the MLA, a historic record he created on 16 March 2017. In this episode, Parrikar as well as his successor Dr Pramod Sawant engineered further defections; not to form the government, but to weaken the opposition. By October, two more Congress MLAs, Subhash Shirodkar and Dayanad Sopte, resigned and got re-elected on BJP tickets.</p>
  <p>After Parrikar’s sad demise two years later, when Sawant took over on 27 March 2019, two of the three MGP legislators: Babu Azgaonkar and Dipak Prabhu Pauskar merged their twothird group into the BJP. Coalition partner Sudin Dhavalikar was dropped. By July 2019, 10 more Congress legislators formed a group of two-thirds and joined the BJP. As a result, all the three ministers of the Goa Forward Party and independent minister Rohan Khaunte were dropped. The coalition partners were dumped, probably because they had started acting ‘over smart’. The BJP rose from 13 to 27 while the Congress was reduced from 17 to five and MGP from three to one. Yet another unique kind of defection episode in India’s political history!</p>
  <p>TOPPLINGS &amp; CMS OF GOA: 1963 TO 2021</p>
  <p>As of the time this book was being penned, a total number of 15 legislators from the Congress and the MGP have quit their parties in order to ‘strengthen’ the hands of Modi-ji. And still, the Congress continues to be in the prime position and the main opposition in the state as Goa goes for a fresh poll in 2022.</p>
  <p>The following table shows how many chief ministers have become victims of rebellions and who ditched their own parties to become chief ministers. However, this list only gives indications of what must have happened during these toppling games. Not only the Congress, but BJP leaders like Manohar Parrikar also became CM for the first time by engineering defections in the Congress camp.</p>
  <p>The history of defections in Goa is so ‘rich’ that I may have to write a special book on it. Just as the tip of the iceberg, here are some random facts and figures. The ninth Assembly of 1999 had 25 professional and habitual defectors out of 40. From 1990 to 2002, after which started the BJP era, Goa had 13 chief ministers in three Assemblies. In these 12 years, defections took place 21 times and the number of detectors was 80. That does not mean 80 MLAs defected. A large chunk among them had defected at least twice in these 12 years. The BJP, for example in 1999, had 10 MLAs in the beginning. When the then CM Manohar Parrikar had suddenly dissolved the Assembly prematurely, the saffron party had 11 defectors with them, more than their own party men. Similarly, in 2017, people had elected only 13 saffronites. Today, as this book goes to print and Goa goes for elections, the BJP has 27 MLAs. More than double!<a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
  <h2 id="christians-love-bjp">Christians ‘Love’ BJP</h2>
  <p>The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) is the umbrella organisation of the Sangh Parivar. The BJP is its political wing, which is supposedly expected to work on the lines of the RSS ideology. Vimarsh Prakashan of New Delhi has recently published a book ‘Future Bharat: An RSS Perspective’. It is a compilation of lectures delivered by RSS Sarsanghchalak Mohan Bhagwat in New Delhi from 17 to 19 September 2018. During these lectures, he was asked a question: <em>“In the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’, the Muslim community has been addressed as enemies. Does the Sangh accept these views?”</em></p>
  <p>Bhagwat gave a lengthy reply as to why Muslims need not fear but must love their motherland, the culture, and our common ancestors, who were all Hindus etc. With regard to the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’ written by M S Golwalkar in 1960, Bhagwat said:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“.... In that book, we have given only his thoughts that were contemporary in nature. You read that book in which you will never find such things… Times are changing; the condition of the organisation also changes; so also, the manner of articulation changes. We have already got permission from Dr Hedgewar to bring about necessary changes…”</em><a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>In the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’, there are three different chapters on ‘Internal Threats to India’, titled ‘The Muslims’, ‘The Christians’, and ‘The Communists’. In one of the paragraphs on ‘The Christians as the Internal Threat’, the book states:</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“.... Such is the role of Christian gentlemen residing in our land today, out to demolish not only the religious and social fabric of our life but also to establish political domination in various pockets and if possible all over the land … Jesus had called upon his followers to give their all to the poor, the ignorant and the downtrodden. But what have his followers done in practice?.... Are we not aware of the atrocious history of Christian missionaries in our own country, of how they carried sword and fire in Goa and elsewhere? There is the story of ‘Saint’ Xavier, who used to experience the highest joy of his life when he used to see the new converts trampling upon their former gods and goddesses, razing their temples to the ground and insulting their own parents and elders who remained Hindus.</em></p>
  <p><em>So long as the Christians here indulge in such activities and consider themselves as agents of the international movement for the spread of Christianity, and refuse to offer their first loyalty to the land of their birth and behave as true children of the heritage and culture of their ancestors, they will remain here as hostiles and will have to be treated as such.”</em><a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13" role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>Did the BJP manage to come to power by remaining hostile towards the Christians in a Hindu-majority Goa?</p>
  <p>BJP leader Manohar Parrikar always called himself a proud Swayamsevak of the RSS and started building the BJP in Goa in the background of the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi issue. Before that, the Jan Sangh and the BJP had made three attempts since 1972 (excluding the combined effort with the Janata Party), but could not garner more than two per cent votes in any of these elections. The saffron party also did not gain more than two per cent votes in the seven seats it contested in the 1989 Assembly election. But in the 1991 Lok Sabha election, Parrikar polled 18 per cent votes in North Goa and rose up to the third position, just two per cent less than the runners-up MGP. Similarly, in South Goa, Shripad Naik polled 14 per cent votes to get to the third position.</p>
  <p>In the 1994 Assembly election, by aligning with the MGP, the BJP made a debut in the eighth Assembly by winning four seats: Manohar Parrikar (Panaji), Shripad Naik (Madkai), Digambar Kamat (Margao) and Narhari Haldankar (Valpoi). It then rose to 10 seats in 1999, 17 seats in 2002 and dropping to 14 in 2007. But the Hindutva party could acquire majority seats of 21 in the 40-member House only when the so-called ‘enemies’ of the RSS were made the friends of the BJP, especially the Christian community and the Muslim minorities. Till then, the saffronites were either leading the governments with the help of the Congress defectors or with the help of small parties available for political auction like the MGP, UGDP etc.</p>
  <p>In 1994, the BJP emerged with a bang, filling the toothless opposition space occupied by the MGP. Parrikar exposed a multi-crore power scam by the then Power Minister Mauvin Godinho in the Rane-led Congress government. (That alleged scamster Mauvin Godinho is now a senior minister in the BJP government!) With a mere one-tenth of the strength of the 40-member Assembly, the BJP also supported from outside the Dr Wilfred de Souza’s defector-government, formed in 1998. The Hindutva party’s first love in the defection game was Dr Willy, the Goan politician known for his ‘Christian politics’.</p>
  <p>His 10-member splinter group – the Goa Rajiv Congress – also included two other Christians MLAs, Carmo Pegado and Fatima D’Sa, besides Dayanand Narvekar, Subhash Shirodkar, Chandrakant Chodankar, Deu Mandrekar, Pandurang Bhatale, Pandu Vasu Naik and Jagdish Acharya. It lasted for only four months. His three ministers – Dayanand Narvekar, Subhash Shirodkar and Pandu Vasu Naik – along with deputy speaker Deu Mandrekar split from the government that was supported by the MGP from inside and by the BJP from outside. The BJP was then quick to demand President’s Rule.</p>
  <p>With this second defection of ‘homecoming’, Luizinho Faleiro became the new Chief Minister of the Congress, but for not more than two-and-a-half months. Within 68 days, two of his ministers, 76-year old Deu Mandrekar (MLA for the third time), along with independent John Manuel Vaz withdrew their support, pushing the Faleiro government into a minority. Dr Willy once again staked his claim with the support of the MGP and the BJP. But suddenly the BJP made a volte face, changed its strategy, and refused to support the Willy government. President’s Rule was imposed on 12 February 1999.<a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14" role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
  <p>For four months till the next Assembly election, Goa witnessed one of the best administrations, run by Governor Lt Gen (Retd) J F R Jacob with only two advisors: Goa-born senior bureaucrat in Delhi Albano Couto and M N Buch.</p>
  <p>After pulling the rug from under Dr Willy’s feet, a similar strategy was played by BJP’s master strategists late Pramod Mahajan and Goa’s Manohar Parrikar, when a fresh Assembly election was announced in 1999. They responded positively to the initiative taken by mine owner Auduth Timblo of Fomento and prolonged the alliance talks with the MGP till the last minute. Then, just a couple of days before the last day of nominations, they broke off the alliance talks on flimsy grounds, throwing the MGP completely off guard. The most powerful opposition party till yesterday had to literally hunt for candidates. The last-minute-ditching strategy worked once again as the BJP turned the tables. The saffron brigade rose from four to 10 while the MGP reduced from 10 to four. Parrikar announced proudly: <em>“Though Lord Rama is our national hero, my idol in politics is Lord Krishna”</em>, obviously referring to <em>Krishna Niti</em> described in Hindu mythology.</p>
  <p>Despite these serial defections, especially by the Congressmen, the Congress still rose to 21 seats, with Luizinho Faleiro once again becoming the Chief Minister. This was the first time the Congress had achieved the magic figure of 21 in the 40-member House. But Faleiro was not confident about his own party colleagues. He engineered defections in all the three smaller parties in order to ‘strengthen’ the Congress. Both UGDP MLAs Suresh Parulekar and Jose Philip D’Souza; Ramakant Khalap and Prakash Velip out of four from the MGP, and Francis D’Souza from the GRC, leaving its leader Dr Willy all alone, joined the Congress. But even the strength of 26 could not sustain Faleiro for more than six months. His archrival Francisco Sardinha split from the Congress with 10 more members, to seize the throne on 24 November 1999.</p>
  <p>The BJP this time participated in the coalition government of defectors, except that Manohar Parrikar did not join the cabinet. Sardinha’s Goa People’s Congress had seven Christian defectors: Sardinha, Alex Sequreira, Victoria Fernandes, Arecio D’Souza, Francis Silveira, Francis D’Souza, and Mauvin Godinho, whose power scam the BJP had exposed just two years earlier. But Sardinha’s defector government buckled within nine months due to Parrikar’s Krishna Niti. In October 2000, Parrikar engineered defections in Sardinha’s GPC as well as more defections in the ‘original’ Congress. Khalap and Velip defected for the second time within nine months from the GPC while Ravi Naik, Shaikh Hassan Haroon, Babu Azgaonkar, and Sanjay Bandekar split from the Congress to join the BJP.</p>
  <p>Parrikar’s 14-member cabinet included two Christians and one Muslim: Filipe Neri Rodrigues, Jose Philip D’Souza and Shaikh Hassan Haroon. But the defection activity had not stopped. Sensing trouble from within his cabinet to topple his one-and-a-half-year old government, Parrikar surprised the whole opportunistic political world of Goa. He suddenly moved into action on 27 February 2002 by convening an emergency cabinet meeting at the International Centre Goa (much closer to the Raj Bhavan than the Panaji Secretariat) and rushed to the Governor at Cabo, recommending dissolution of the two-anda- half-year old Assembly.</p>
  <p>Though his letter claimed that the premature dissolution was recommended by the cabinet, the cabinet members were totally in the dark. They heard about it from us: the media. Opposition Leader Luizinho Faleiro alleged that the dissolution was not on the official agenda of the cabinet. But it simply didn’t matter to the Governor since who mattered as per the Constitution was the Chief Minister, not his council of ministers. The Governor was bound to implement the cabinet recommendation. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was heading the BJP government at the Centre at this moment and Mohammed Fazal, a BJP loyalist, was the Goa Governor. With the Centre’s blessings, Parrikar managed to continue as a Caretaker Government with his entire cabinet, until a fresh election was held on 30 May 2002, coincidentally on Goa Statehood Day!<a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15" role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
  <p>After that the BJP changed its entire political strategy. It had realised that the Hindutva religious card didn’t work in Goa. Parrikar, during his short stint, had performed very well, especially in financial management by presenting some brilliant budgets and raising revenue locally by filling the loopholes. He had also filled the public treasury through non-tax revenue, which had not been revised by his Congress predecessors for two to three decades. Parrikar thus made Good Governance his main plank and pushed his Soft Hindutva strategy under the carpet. This proud RSS Swayamsevak had skilfully revamped his image as a minority-friendly political leader. In 1999, the BJP had fielded only four candidates from the minorities, in the Christian-dominated constituencies of Old Conquests, especially in Tiswadi, Mormugao, and Salcete talukas: Socorro Fernandes (St Cruz), Anthony Fernandes (Cortalim), Julio D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina (Navelim). Among them, only two candidates rose up to runner-up position: D’Silva in Cuncolim by polling 26 per cent votes and Jina in Navelim with 14 per cent votes against Luizinho Faleiro who polled 75 per cent votes.</p>
  <p>However, in the 2002 Assembly poll, the BJP fielded eight minority candidates (out of 39) in the four talukas of the Old Conquests: Francis D’Souza (Mapusa), Tony Rodrigues (Taleigao), Shaikh Hassan Haroon (Mormugao), Anthony Vaz (Cortalim), Jose Pinheiro (Loutolim), Laxmi Gonsalves (Benaulim), Julio D’Silva (Cuncolim) and Shaikh Jina (Navelim). Out of these, Francis D’Souza not only got elected, but remained as the BJP MLA for four consecutive terms till 2017. After his sad demise, his son Joshua is now a BJP legislator. Rodrigues (25%) and Shaikh Hassan (28%) stood at second position while Vaz (27%) and D’Silva (20%) held the third position.<a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16" role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
  <p>Parrikar became the CM once again on 3 June 2002, with the BJP rising to 17 seats in a hung Assembly. It was one seat more than the 16-member Congress. With the BJP still ruling at the Centre, he formed the government with the support of the three-member UGDP, two-member MGP and Independent Filipe Neri Rodrigues. He had four Christian ministers: Francisco D’Souza from the BJP, Babush Monserrate and Mickky Pacheco from the UGDP and Filipe Neri, the independent. After Mickky was dropped from the cabinet in June 2004, Matanhy Saldanha from the UGDP was accommodated. To strengthen his government, Parrikar engineered defections once again, with Madkaikar quitting the MGP, Babush quitting the UGDP and Isidore Fernandes from the Congress. They were made ministers, increasing the strength of the Christian ministers by two more.<a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
  <p>Then in some dramatic incidents witnessed in the Assembly, including the physical eviction of Filipe Neri by the police from the House, the Parrikar government was reduced to a minority within two years and eight months. It began with Parrikar dropping Babush from the ministry. That led to Madkaikar and Isidore quitting the BJP. Then Mickky joined the BJP and quit it in one day, claiming that he believed in front-stabbing, not back-stabbing. The coalition partners − the MGP and Filipe Neri Rodrigues − withdrew support to the government. While the newly sworn in Congress government led by Pratapsingh Rane was in trouble due to disqualifications and other vexing issues, the three-time BJP MLA Digambar Kamat came to his rescue. Claiming that he had been suffocating in the Hindutva party all those years, he quit the BJP. It is known as the Ghusmat episode in the history of Goan politics!</p>
  <p>This was the time when China had emerged as the major client for Goan iron ore, including the low quality rejects. Illegal mining had slowly started rising in Goa while three-time BJP MLA Digambar Kamat was the Minister for Mines. Auduth Timblo of Fomento Mines moved into action, took his ‘political revenge’ on the BJP for breaking its alliance with the MGP in 1999 and put a stop to the uncertainty over the survival of the Rane government. Digambar continued as the Mines Minister.</p>
  <p>The government also faced a historic agitation in 2006 against the disastrous Regional Plan framed by the Town and Country Planning Minister Babush Monserrate. The construction lobby of land grabbers had gone on a rampage, and people across Goa were up in arms. Bowing before the public outcry, Babush was dropped and the disastrous Regional Plan was scrapped. The Rane government survived till the next Assembly election.</p>
  <p>In the 2007 election, the BJP slipped down to 14, the Congress rose to 16 in a hung Assembly once again. With illegal mining booming, mines minister Digambar Kamat rose to become CM and Parrikar became the Opposition Leader for five long years, without any toppling or defection taking place despite a hung Assembly. The BJP fielded only four Christian candidates, of which only Francis D’Souza won. Agnelo Silveira (Taleigao), Antonio Caído (St André) and Milagres Gonsalves (Cuncolim) lost.</p>
  <p>Riding over the rampant illegal mining, which was later estimated by Justice Shah Commission to be to the tune of Rs 35,000 crore rupees, Kamat impressed the Goan populace by presenting an alternate environment-friendly Regional Plan prepared by a Task Force led by Goa-born internationally famed architect Charles Correa. Kamat also scrapped the five Special Economic Zones, which were exposed as a real estate land scam. However, on the other hand, the unabated destruction of the hinterland and even the Sahyadri Ghat continued, until the Supreme Court banned Goa’s mining activity in 2012. Parrikar, as the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, had exposed the illegal mining steered by Kamat.</p>
  <p>The opposition leader also led the agitation against Medium of Instruction when Kamat continued government grants to the 127 English medium primary schools run by the Church. It was directly in contravention of the government policy of 1992 not to give government grants to English medium schools. Accordingly all the Church schools had switched over to Konkani medium. But no government had followed its preventive clause not to permit new English medium private primary schools. Private English schools kept mushrooming with the blessings of the double-standard politicians. This duplicity resulted in the increasing trend of parents sending their children to English medium primary schools. This exodus drastically affected the strength of the Konkani schools run by the Church. After running Konkani schools for two long decades, the Church-run Diocesan Society of Education finally decided to switch back to the English medium. Digambar Kamat assured to continue their salary grants. A state-wide agitation began against this, led by Konkani leaders, who joined hands with the Sangh Parivar. Parrikar also joined the agitation of the Bharatiya Bhasha Suraksha Manch (BBSM) to oppose the Church.</p>
  <p>In spite of this, the Church came in support of Parrikar and his BJP in the 2012 Assembly election, in order to teach a lesson to the corrupt and defector-driven Congress, which was taking the Christian community for granted.</p>
  <p>In the 2012 election, the BJP strategically contested only 28 seats, by supporting the Mickky-led Goa Vikas Party in Salcete, as well as three independents. In addition, the Hindutva party fielded six Christian candidates. All of them won: Francis D’Souza (Mapusa), Michael Lobo (Calangute), Glenn Ticlo (Aldona), Carlos Almeida (Vasco), Matanhy Saldanha (Cortalim) and Nilesh Cabral (Curchorem). The BJP won 21 seats, besides the two GVP MLAs, Mickky Pacheco (Nuvem) and Caitu Silva (Benaulim) as well as the two independents it had supported: Avertano Furtado (Navelim) and Benjamin Silva (Velim). The Hindu-Christian ‘Bahujan formula’ of Bhau Bandodkar worked well for the BJP too!</p>
  <p>Since then, the BJP in Goa has been holding its fort with the help of Christians. In the last election held in 2017, the BJP slipped down to 13 while the Congress rose from nine to 17, once again in a hung Assembly. Out of these 13, seven MLAs were Christians. Perhaps it is a record that the saffron party has created in India, where the majority of its legislators belonged to the minority community. Both the BJP and the Church were soft to each other. Due to this and the BJP being in power at the centre, Parrikar managed to fly the tricolour flag on the banks of river Mandovi on the Independence Day, once again by using the crutches of the power-hungry regional outfits. He moved down to Goa, leaving the influential defence ministry of the country, to hold the reins of power</p>
  <p>After Parrikar’s sudden demise in March 2019 due to pancreatic cancer, Dr Pramod Sawant, the only BJP cadre politician left in the legislative party, succeeded him. In order to strengthen its position in the Assembly, the BJP continued to engineer defections in the Congress as well as the MGP. While the saffron party is 27-member strong today, 15 among them are Christians.</p>
  <p>Since 2002, the Hindutva party has succeeded in electing almost 12 Christian legislators. From time to time, nine more Christian MLAs have defected and held the saffron lotus on their shoulders with pride. In addition, almost 10 more Christian MLAs have split from the Congress and ruled hand-in-hand with the Hindutva party.</p>
  <p>Due to this, the BJP in Goa had to also face the wrath of its parent organisation, the RSS. Goa witnessed a state-wide revolt by the RSS cadres, led by its state-level Sanghchalak Principal Subhash Velingkar, on the eve of the 2017 Assembly election. To avoid displeasing the Church and the Christian community, Parrikar followed his predecessor Digambar Kamat in continuing salary grants to the Church-run English schools. The agitation started once again. Velingkar converted the BBSM into a political outfit − the Goa Suraksha Manch (GSM). He vowed to finish the “anti-national” BJP!</p>
  <p>The GSM lost all the five seats it contested, securing barely 10 per cent of the votes. But the RSS cadres certainly succeeded in defeating many BJP candidates by diverting their votes to the winning candidates, no matter which party they belonged to. It even included Babush Monserrate in Panaji and Vijay Sardesai in Fatorda. The GSM was created only for those hardcore BJP sympathisers, who would never vote for the Congress or other anti-BJP outfits. It had a huge impact. A total of 12 BJP bigwigs lost their elections. It included the sitting chief minister Laxmikant Parsekar, ministers Rajendra Arlekar, Dyanand Mandrekar, Dilip Parulekar, and Mahadev Naik, sitting MLAs Kiran Kandolkar, Subhash Naik, Ganesh Gaonkar and Subhash Phaldesai as well as former MLAs Damu Naik, Prakash Velip, and Vijay Pai Khot.</p>
  <p>Velingkar later on admitted in a ‘Straightforward’ interview with me that <em>“our priority in the 2017 election was to defeat the BJP, not to get the GSM elected. We did not give a public call to divert our votes to the winning candidate. Our RSS cadres are intelligent enough to know what is the priority and act accordingly.”</em><a href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18" role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a></p>
  <p>As a result, the BJP was left with only four from the original cadres of the party including Dr Pramod Sawant, Sidharth Kuncolienker, Rajesh Patnekar, and Milind Naik. Pandurang Madkaikar and Pravin Zantye were lifted from the Congress. On the other hand, all the seven Christian MLAs of the BJP were re-elected. Only Arthur D’Silva in Curtorim lost to Alex Reginald Lourenco of the Congress. And in most of the seats where the BJP did not have Christian candidates, the Congress won. It looked like the Church had played the Krishna Niti of Parrikar. It worked, as the BJP eventually came to power and the continuation of salary grants to the Church-run English medium schools is now no longer an issue.</p>
  <p>Velingkar, the political Guru of Parrikar, decided to take ahead his task even after his disciple had died and a fresh bye-election was announced for Parrikar’s vacant Panaji seat on 19 May 2019. Velingkar himself entered the fray against BJP’s Siddharth Kuncolienker. His defeat was really pathetic. The RSS rebel leader could garner hardly three per cent votes; 516 to be precise. He lost to the BJP as well as the Congress and announced his retirement from election politics. Babush Monserrate, the victorious Congress MLA, is now in the BJP while his wife Jennifer is a minister!</p>
  <p>This is the way the BJP is surviving today in Goa. By having almost 16 old and new Congressmen as their MLAs from among its 27, it has become the Bharatiya Janata Party of the Congress. And with 15 Christian MLAs, the Hindutva party has also become the party of majority Christians. The enemies described in the ‘Bunch of Thoughts’ have become friends of the Hindutva party and the friends like the RSS rebels have become the arch enemies of the BJP.</p>
  <p>These are the dynamics of the Ajeeb politics of Goa!!!</p>
  <h2 id="the-regional-rejects">The Regional ‘Rejects’</h2>
  <p>The Opinion Poll proved that when Goans want to protect their language, culture, ecology or identity, they think beyond politics. But when they think about politics, they don’t support the regional parties espousing the regional sentiments. For that matter, not a single regional party could come to power or even strengthen its roots in Goa’s political soil in the last 60 years. On the contrary, they were uprooted by the Goan voters. All such experiments have failed miserably.</p>
  <p>The only regional party that could come to power and rule Goa for 16 long years uninterruptedly was the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party. But was it a regional party in its true sense? In fact, the MGP was formed to eliminate Goa’s regional Konkani identity by merging it into a Marathi state.</p>
  <p>On the other hand, the United Goans Party, which fought for a separate state, could never cross 12 seats in the 28-seat Goa (Daman and Diu were one seat each). In fact, in the third election held in 1972, the UGP slipped down to 10 seats while the MGP rose to 18. That was the last election for the United Goans Party. The UGP then simply disappeared from Goa’s political scenario as its tall regional leaders like Dr Jack Sequeira and Anant alias Babu Naik preferred to join the national parties like the Janata Party and the Congress respectively.</p>
  <p>The MGP continues. But after losing the battle of making Marathi the official language in 1986-87, the party became a ‘workshop’ for the Congress, supplying candidates to them as and when required. Its prominent leaders kept on jumping out of the sinking ship to try their luck with the national parties. The BJP, in the meanwhile, captured MGP’s dedicated vote bank, making the Lion completely powerless. And now Sudin Dhavalikar, its new supremo, has turned the roaring Lion into a begging Lion. The ‘party of individuals’ shamelessly negotiates power-sharing in the hung Assemblies. We can unhesitantly call it a ‘stepney’ for Congress as well as the BJP, with no ideology of any sort except greed for power.</p>
  <p>Nationally, Goa has been at the forefront, fighting issues of regional identity and protecting its ecology for the last 50 years. It began with pollution at Zuari Agro Industries and protecting interests of traditional workmen like Render (toddy tappers) and Ramponkar (traditional fishermen) in the 70s, a militant students’ movement and violent Konkani movement in the 80s, opposing allegedly polluting projects like Nylon 6,6, alignment of Konkan railway, and destruction of the coastal belt due to five-star tourism in the 90s and state-wide agitation against the destructive Regional Plan as well as diversion of Mhadei river in the first decade of the 21st century. And now, it is fighting illegal mining and casino-drugs-driven tourism as well as opposing three linear projects – double-tracking of a rail line from Karnataka’s Hospet to Vasco, laying down a 400-kV power transmission line through the Sahyadri range in Mollem and four-laning of the existing NH 4A.</p>
  <p>THE FATE OF REGIONAL PARTIES</p>
  <table>
  <thead>
  <tr class="header">
  <th>No</th>
  <th>Party</th>
  <th>Polls</th>
  <th>Contested</th>
  <th>Candidates</th>
  <th>Won</th>
  <th>%</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>1</td>
  <td>United Goans Party</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>102</td>
  <td>35</td>
  <td>34%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>2</td>
  <td>Gomant Lok Pokx</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>16</td>
  <td>00</td>
  <td>00</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>3</td>
  <td>United Goans Democratic Party</td>
  <td>5</td>
  <td>65</td>
  <td>9</td>
  <td>14%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>4</td>
  <td>Goa Vikas Party</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>18</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>11%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>5</td>
  <td>Goa Suraj Party</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>11</td>
  <td>00</td>
  <td>00</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td>6</td>
  <td>Save Goa Front</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>17</td>
  <td>2</td>
  <td>12%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="odd">
  <td>7</td>
  <td>Goa Forward Party</td>
  <td>1</td>
  <td>4</td>
  <td>3</td>
  <td>35%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr class="even">
  <td></td>
  <td>TOTAL</td>
  <td>21</td>
  <td>233</td>
  <td>51</td>
  <td>22%</td>
  <td></td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  <p>But none of these regional sentiments, except the anti-merger movement, translated into a robust regional party that would challenge the mighty national parties like the Congress and the BJP. On the contrary, the following table clearly shows the pathetic condition of the regional parties in Goa, from 1963 till 2017 elections:</p>
  <p>The table does not include the MGP since it is not a regional party in its true sense of regionalism. It also does not include the parties formed due to rebellions in the parent parties. And, of course, the question simply doesn’t arise to include the parties (or the groups) formed by defectors to topple the governments of the parent parties, to seize power. The table has listed only those regional parties which were formed much before elections, independently, with regional aspirations, as an alternative to the national parties.</p>
  <p><strong>UGP</strong>: The only regional party that was overwhelmingly supported by the people of Goa was the Dr Jack Sequeira-led United Goans Party. It actually contested only the first three elections, from 1963 to 1972, displaying an impressive voting percentage between 30 to 38 per cent. Babush Monserrate, in 2017, revived the party and contested two seats. He won from Panaji, but his so-called associate Ramakant Borkar was in the sixth position with a mere seven per cent of the votes.</p>
  <p>None of the other regional outfits could cross 21 per cent votes (UGDP in 2002 election with ten candidates won three seats). The only exception is the Goa Forward Party, which polled 35 per cent of votes in 2017. But it had fielded only four candidates, and three of them emerged victorious.</p>
  <p>In fact, except for the UGP, none of these regional parties had aimed at coming to power on their own. While the magic figure to form the government is 21 in the 40-member Assembly, no regional party, since 1989, even contested more than half of the seats. Most of the time, they contested less than ten seats, sometimes just one or two seats. This itself is ample proof that these regional parties were not formed to lead the regional aspirations of the Goans and rule Goa. The sole and whole intention was to share power with the big national parties.</p>
  <p>Precisely this is the reason they could win hardly 51 seats out of 233 seats all these parties contested from time to time. And if we exclude the UGP era, we realise that the rest of the six parties won only 16 seats out of 131 seats they contested in 17 different elections in nearly three decades. That’s pathetic.</p>
  <p><strong>GLP</strong>: Gomant Lok Pokx was one regional party that had evolved through people’s struggles like Render (toddy tappers), Ramponkar (traditional fishermen), factory and mining workers, motorcycle pilots etc. It was demanding the continued implementation of the Tenancy Act. It was also espousing the cause of ‘Sons of the Soil’, which had migrants as its target. The party was led by two former MPs, Adv Amrut Kansar and Erasmo Sequeira as well social activists like Victoria Fernandes, Matanhy Saldanha, Celso Dias, Antonio Fernandes, etc.</p>
  <p>The party contested two Lok Sabha elections of 1984 and 1991, but polled around three-four per cent votes which came down to less than one per cent in the second contest. In the 1989 Assembly election, the GLP contested only 11 seats, that too in the Old Conquests, like Tivim, Calangute, Saligao, Panaji, Taleigao, St Cruz, St Andre, Loutolim and Cortalim. Prashant Naik among them had withdrawn from Canacona at the last minute. The overall percentage was not more than 12 per cent in 11 places. Only Victoria could garner around 4500 votes and lost to Congress MLA Victor Gonsalves. All others lost miserably. In 1994, they once again contested only four seats including Erasmo Sequeira and Matanhy Saldanha, but could not poll more than three per cent votes.</p>
  <p><strong>UGDP</strong>: While the GLP experiment had failed, in 1994, another regional experiment emerged across Goa: the United Goans Democratic Party. It was originally formed at the behest of Dr Wilfred de Souza to embarrass his rival, the then chief minister Ravi Naik. Raghurai Tamba, a Panaji-based businessman, had taken Ravi head-on some gelatine-related issue. He was the founder president of the party. Churchill Alemao, as he claims, did not found the UGDP. In fact, after quitting the Congress to topple Rane, this ‘18-day chief minister’ was hunting for a party to contest from.<a href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19" role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
  <p>The UGDP accommodated him, while fielding 20 candidates in the 1994 poll. It had two former MLAs as the candidates: Luis Proto Barbosa (19%) and Radharao Gracias (41%). Both of them lost to the Congress, in Cortalim and Loutolim respectively. But in the first attempt itself, three MLAs were elected by defeating Congress bigwigs: Churchill Alemao beat Monte Cruz in Benaulim, Antonio Gaonkar grounded Francisco Sardinha in Curtorim, and Arecio D’Souza defeated the then GPCC president Shantaram Naik in Cuncolim.</p>
  <p>The party however was found to be more effective in the Christian-dominated constituencies of the Old Conquests. Four more candidates faired quite well: Nazario Pinto (34%) against Luizinho Faleiro in Navelim, Simon Caido (19%) against Carmo Pegado in St Andre, Filipe Neri Rodrigues (19%) against Manu Fernandes in Velim and Shaikh Muhammad Akbar (12%) against Digambar Kamat of BJP in Madgao. Also in Curchorem, Luis Diniz polled 17% votes against Domnic Fernandes. But Tamba, the president, could not even mobilise one per cent votes in Panaji. Similar was the really pathetic condition of other candidates in Pernem, Dhargalim, Pale, Shiroda, Sanguem, Quepem and Canacona in the New Conquests as well as Vasco and Fatorda in the Old Conquests.</p>
  <p>The UGDP then decided to take five-term Congress MP Eduardo Faleiro head-on in the 1996 Lok Sabha poll. Churchill Alemao on the UGDP ticket defeated him, after which he resigned as the Benaulim MLA. In a bye-election held on 11 October 1996, his brother Joaquim Alemao was elected from Benaulim. This victory made Churchill popular throughout Goa, including in the New Conquests. He was pulling crowds of Hindus as well as Christians and Muslims in the Old as well as New Conquests, even in the interiors of Sattari. For the people, he was a long-awaited messiah.</p>
  <p>But the non-Congress governments of H D Deve Gowda and I K Gujral at the centre could not last for long and fresh general elections were announced in 1998. UGDP MP Churchill lost this election to the Congress as well as the BJP candidates. The dejected Churchill struck a deal and joined the Congress along with his brother Joaquim and Arecio D’Souza. He and Arecio also got elected in Benaulim and Cuncolim in the 1999 Assembly election.</p>
  <p>By this time, two activist lawyers of Salcete, Anacleto Viegas and Radharao Gracias, had taken over the control of the UGDP. The party fielded 15 candidates, polled 15 per cent votes and also got two MLAs elected: former MLA Suresh Parulekar from Calangute and Jose Philip D’Souza from Vasco. Radharao contested from Benaulim but lost the battle to his former colleague Churchill. Similarly, another lawyer friend and former MLA Herculano Dourado also lost to Congress MLA Mauvin Godinho in Cortalim. The party candidates could not even save deposits in 12 of the remaining 13 seats.</p>
  <p>After that the UGDP became a party to strike deals with some wealthy ambitious politicians to raise funds, with which serious candidates of the party were trying their luck. It worked well in the 2002 Assembly poll. Out of 10 candidates it fielded, two wealthy and ambitious politicians got elected: Babush Monseratte from Taleigao and Mickky Pacheco from Benaulim, who defeated Churchill. In the bargain, Matanhy Saldanha from the party cadre also got elected from Cortalim. Radharao however once again lost the battle against Congress MLA Alexio Sequeira in Loutolim. Some former MLAs also tried their luck with the UGDP, but lost, like veteran UGP MLA Teotonio Pereira in St Andre, ex-minister Monte Cruz in Fatorda, and ex- MLA Victor Gonsalves in St Cruz.</p>
  <p>By the end of the term, Babush had travelled to the BJP and then Congress to grab ministerial positions in both the governments. Mickky had formed his own UGDP (Secular) while staunch anti-Congressman Matanhy had joined hands with BJP’s Manohar Parrikar while remaining in the party.</p>
  <p>In the 2007 election, the UGDP lawyer-duo struck new deals with Congress rejects including Babush Monserrate, who won in Taleigao. His wife Jennifer also entered the election arena from St Cruz to score in the third position. Matanhy Saldanha lost to Mauvin Godinho once again while ex-MLA Prakash Phadte lost in Mayem. Joseph Sequeira in Calangute and Dr Jorson Fernandes in Cuncolim lost too. The others were simply negligible in their performance.</p>
  <p>The 2012 election was so pathetic for the UGDP that none of their seven candidates were known politicians and none of them could score well. The total percentage was hardly six per cent. In fact, their Pernem candidate Santosh Mandrekar set a new record of gaining the lowest number of votes: 50. The party did not contest the 2017 election. Now for the forthcoming 2022 election, its president Dr Jorson Fernandes has joined the Trinamool Congress, with due ‘permission’ from the UGDP supremos: Radharao Gracias and Anacleto Viegas.</p>
  <p><strong>GOA FORWARD</strong>: On the eve of the Assembly election 2017 and on the eve of India’s Republic Day, on 25 January 2016, a new regional party came into being: the Goa Forward Party. The core slogan was Goem, Goenkar, Goenkarponn (Goa, Goan, Goan Ethos). It was floated by Vijai Sardesai, an independent MLA from Fatorda who was denied Congress ticket in 2012. He mobilised the best political brains of South Goa, made eminent educationist and political analyst Prabhakar Timble the President and entered the fray on an anti-BJP plank. After a series of alliance talks with the Congress failed, the GFP fielded four candidates. Barring Velim, GFP won three seats: Vijai Sardesai (Fatorda), Jayesh Salgaoankar (Saligao) and Vinod Palienkar (Siolim).</p>
  <p>However, when the time came to form the coalition government, GFP leader Vijai Sardesai made a 360 degree turnaround and surrendered to the mighty central leaders of the BJP, who were running the government at the Centre.</p>
  <p>‘Professional negotiator’ MGP also joined the cabinet besides two more independents. In protest, GFP President Prabhakar Timble resigned from the party. Other social activists like Mohandas Lolienkar, Prashant Naik, Dilip Prabhudesai, Saiesh Palondikar etc. however stood behind Vijai. The GFP also became a partner in the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) at the national level.</p>
  <p>As has been narrated in the earlier section on defections, the GFP was finally dropped from the government in July 2019. Since then, Vijai Sardesai claims to be hard-core anti-BJP once again. He has tried repeatedly to have a pre-poll alliance to defeat the BJP ‘unitedly’, after which he also tried to align with Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress. He initially agreed and then backed out from the offer of merging the GFP into the TMC and began fresh talks with the Congress. Meantime party MLA Jayesh Salgaokar resigned and joined the BJP, while the working president Kiran Khandolkar, a former BJP MLA, crossed over to the TMC. However, in the bargain, the five-year old regional outfit has faded out its shining colours of Goem, Goenkar, Goenkarponn. The party supposedly of regional aspirations has proved to be yet another ‘negotiator party’ of personal aspirations!</p>
  <p><strong>REVOLUTIONARY GOANS</strong>: Calling itself Uzzo (Fire), a section of youth of Goa have started gathering around a new political outfit − the Revolutionary Goans (RG), which began as a social organisation five years ago. Its fiery speaker Manoj Parab has been pulling large crowds, especially in the Old Conquests and the tourism belt. Utilising social media effectively, the RG has now entered the electoral fray under the banner of the Goa Suraj Party. It has introduced a Person Of Goan Origin (POGO) bill, which they want to be passed by the Goa Assembly. They are primarily targeting the influx of migrants and want all the government facilities, schemes, policies, and programmes limited to the people of Goan origin. They also demand the scrapping of the 15-year domicile clause.</p>
  <p>The POGO bill defines a person of Goan Origin as</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“a person who is or whose either parent or grandparent were born in Goa prior to 20 December 1961 or who had a permanent habitation in Goa prior to 20 December 1961 and who were citizens of India post-liberation irrespective of nationality or passport they hold currently.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>The RG wants cent per cent jobs in government and private establishments, possession of Communidade land, EDC loans and subsidies, as well as shops and properties in government establishments only for the persons of Goan origin.</p>
  <blockquote>
  <p><em>“RG will fight tooth and nail any sort of discrimination against Goans, which is already being witnessed. This is aimed at promoting and encouraging vote bank politics and making Goans irrelevant. Such discrimination against us in issuance of ration cards, aadhar cards, voting cards, giving them spaces to do business as well as residences, also jobs, has resulted in such frustration among the son of the soil that there has been a virtual exodus of Goans from Goa, thus leaving greater scope for an increased influx of migrants into Goa.”</em></p>
  </blockquote>
  <p>RG also opposes migrants encroaching on government and Communidade lands while also blaming migrants for spreading various types of diseases, and their involvement in criminal activities. Their official pamphlet does not denounce Goans who are also involved in such illegal, unhealthy, or criminal activities.</p>
  <p>Also another distinct feature of the RG is that the party has evolved through a social organisation they set up five years ago and has also encouraged Goan youth to take up different opportunities being made available due to the changing socioeconomic conditions of Goa.</p>
  <p>These two chapters have tried to highlight the unique aspects of Goan politics from 1963 till date, with the Ajeeb character of the Goan voter, the politician, as well as the Goan polity. The rest of the book will try to explore the root causes behind this kind of politics, which seems stranger or Ajeeb than the rest of India. With the BJP government trying to enforce the Bhumiputra Adhikarini Bill and the brand new political outfit the Revolutionary Goans pursuing an ethnic movement for the “Sons of the Soil Only”, this book will also try and dig into history to perceive who is the Bhumiputra of Goa, the Goan who has migrated, or the migrant who is settled in Goa. It will also try to show how Goan politics, since the ancient times of its first settlements till date, has been moving around just one distinct component of Goa – ITS LAND!</p>
  <section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" role="doc-endnotes">
  <hr />
  <ol>
  <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; हा कौल जनतेचा आहे, 13 डि सेंबर 1963<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोमंतक; श्री दयानंद बांदोडकर यांचे पं नेहरूं ना उत्तर, 17 डि सेंबर 1963<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा, पान 46<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>Election Commission of India<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>राधाकृष्ण वामन; मुक्ति नंतरचा गोवा, पान 75-76<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>Shirodkar Dr P P; Who’s Who of Freedom Fighters<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>Election Commission of India<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn8" role="doc-endnote"><p>itsgoa.com and pamphlet of Sangharsh Natya Manch, cultural wing of Progressive Students’<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn9" role="doc-endnote"><p>बेळेकर सुहास; गोव्या तील नि वडणुका, विधानसभा व लोकसभा 1963 ते 2014<a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn10" role="doc-endnote"><p>Election Commission of Indoa<a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn11" role="doc-endnote"><p>Goanews.com; Defector is most powerful, 20 April 2002<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn12" role="doc-endnote"><p>Bhagwat Dr Mohan; Future Bharat- An RSS Perspective, P 87-89<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn13" role="doc-endnote"><p>गोळवलकर मा स; विचारधन (पाचवी आवृत्तीः डि सेंबर 2001), पान 177<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn14" role="doc-endnote"><p>goanews.com<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn15" role="doc-endnote"><p>rediff.com; Goa Assembly dissolved, Parrikar to continue as<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn16" role="doc-endnote"><p>Election Commission of India<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn17" role="doc-endnote"><p>goanews.com<a href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn18" role="doc-endnote"><p>goa365.tv; ‘Straightforward’ with Subhash Velingkar, 28 January 2018<a href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  <li id="fn19" role="doc-endnote"><p>Interview with Adv Radharao Gracias<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
  </ol>
  </section>
</body>
</html>
